[Unknown]: I.V.M.
[Amit Varma]: The driving theme of my life is procrastination.
[Amit Varma]: In fact, my epitaph could be,
[Amit Varma]: Here lies a man who waited and waited,
[Amit Varma]: and now the wait is over.
[Amit Varma]: I find it hard to get things started,
[Amit Varma]: or to keep them going once I do get them started.
[Amit Varma]: It was different with the seen and the unseen.
[Amit Varma]: When Amit Doshi, who runs I.V.M. podcast,
[Amit Varma]: came to me and asked if I wanted to do a podcast with him,
[Amit Varma]: I said no.
[Amit Varma]: I didn't listen to podcasts,
[Amit Varma]: I didn't understand why other people listen to podcasts,
[Amit Varma]: I wasn't interested.
[Amit Varma]: But he persisted,
[Amit Varma]: and I mentioned an idea I had for a TV interview show
[Amit Varma]: I wanted to do one day,
[Amit Varma]: called the seen and the unseen.
[Amit Varma]: He said, hey, let's do a podcast instead.
[Amit Varma]: And I figured, yeah,
[Amit Varma]: television wasn't happening anytime soon,
[Amit Varma]: so why not, let's jump into this.
[Amit Varma]: We did one episode,
[Amit Varma]: then another,
[Amit Varma]: and another.
[Amit Varma]: And here we are now,
[Amit Varma]: 100 episodes.
[Amit Varma]: The basic principle that got me here,
[Amit Varma]: take one step,
[Amit Varma]: and then just keep putting one foot in front of the other.
[Amit Varma]: There's a life lesson in there that I need to learn from.
[Unknown]: Welcome to the seen and the unseen,
[Unknown]: our weekly podcast on economics, politics, and behavioral science.
[Amit Varma]: Please welcome your host, Amit Badma.
[Amit Varma]: Welcome to the seen and the unseen.
[Amit Varma]: How does one celebrate a 100th episode?
[Amit Varma]: I like to keep celebrations low-key.
[Amit Varma]: I don't like to celebrate my birthday and so on.
[Amit Varma]: But I thought the least I can do for my 100th episode
[Amit Varma]: is get a special guest on the show.
[Amit Varma]: Not some celebrity superstar or a big public intellectual,
[Amit Varma]: but someone with whom I can always reliably have conversations that are special,
[Amit Varma]: at least for me.
[Amit Varma]: My guest today is my good friend, Shruti Rajgopalan,
[Amit Varma]: who teaches economics at Purchase College in New York,
[Amit Varma]: but happens to be here in Mumbai now.
[Amit Varma]: So this is actually going to be a face-to-face conversation,
[Amit Varma]: unlike the Skype conversations we usually have.
[Amit Varma]: I think this is her 8th appearance on the show,
[Amit Varma]: and quite apart from the fact that she is so brilliant and insightful.
[Amit Varma]: I think it might be because she is the one person I know
[Amit Varma]: whose views are closest to mine.
[Amit Varma]: We agree with each other on most things,
[Amit Varma]: which leads to two possible reasons for why I like having her on the show.
[Amit Varma]: One, she validates my sparkling insights.
[Amit Varma]: Two, she confirms my biases.
[Amit Varma]: I'm inclined to think it's a former, but that could just be my bias.
[Amit Varma]: Before we start shooting the breeze though, a quick commercial break.
[Amit Varma]: Like me, are you someone who loves fine art,
[Amit Varma]: but can't really afford to have paintings by the artists you like hanging on your walls?
[Amit Varma]: Well, worry no more. Head on over to IndianColors.com.
[Amit Varma]: Indian Colors is a company that licenses images of the finest modern art
[Amit Varma]: from some of the best artists in India,
[Amit Varma]: and adapts them into objects of everyday use.
[Amit Varma]: These include wearable art, like stoles and shrugs,
[Amit Varma]: home decor like cushion covers and table runners,
[Amit Varma]: and accessories like tote bags.
[Amit Varma]: This allows art lovers to actually get fine art into their homes at an accessible price,
[Amit Varma]: and artists get royalties on sales, just like authors do.
[Amit Varma]: What's more, Indian Colors now has an exciting range of new products,
[Amit Varma]: including fridge magnets with some stunning motifs,
[Amit Varma]: and salad bowls and platters made of mango wood.
[Amit Varma]: Their artists include luminaries like Babu Xavier, Vasvo x Vasvo,
[Amit Varma]: Brinda Miller, Dilip Sharma, Shruti Nelson, and Pradeep Mishra.
[Amit Varma]: They accept bulk orders for corporate and festival gifting,
[Amit Varma]: but even if you want to buy just for yourself or a friend,
[Amit Varma]: head on over to IndianColors.com.
[Amit Varma]: That's colors with an O-U.
[Amit Varma]: And if you want a 20% discount, apply the code IVM20.
[Amit Varma]: That's I-V-M for IVM Podcast.
[Amit Varma]: IVM20 for a 20% discount at IndianColors.com.
[Guest]: Yeah, I know what you mean.
[Guest]: There's a slight, like maybe half a second delay,
[Guest]: and sometimes we've spoken over each other just for half a sentence.
[Guest]: I'll do my best to do the same in the studio.
[Amit Varma]: Right. So you made a list of kind of, you know,
[Amit Varma]: the impressions that have stayed with you over a hundred episodes,
[Amit Varma]: or the last 99 episodes of the seen and the unseen.
[Guest]: So first, I must congratulate you.
[Guest]: What works, what doesn't work?
[Guest]: Well, I don't know about that.
[Guest]: I don't think of these things very critically in terms,
[Guest]: I'm not judging every guest and every person.
[Guest]: I usually think of it as, you know,
[Guest]: some kind of a learning exercise that usually most of your guests
[Guest]: have an insight that I wouldn't have thought of.
[Guest]: And even if the insight is, you know, very straightforward,
[Guest]: and it's a simple idea,
[Guest]: they bring in a particular amount of context to the area of the world
[Guest]: that they're speaking about, which I learn a lot from.
[Guest]: So I usually think of this in a sort of professorial way
[Guest]: of how do you more critically engage with ideas.
[Guest]: I'm not very critical about the guests.
[Guest]: I'm my favorite guest on your show.
[Guest]: No, I'm kidding. I have a few favorites.
[Guest]: I really loved Gunwant Patil. I think he was amazing.
[Guest]: What I loved about his show was he has recognized the first principles
[Guest]: of liberty and markets, but not the way I did,
[Guest]: coming from books from Adam Smith and Frederick Hayek
[Guest]: and Frederick Bastiat and so on.
[Guest]: It's sort of like farming. He's sort of homegrown, you know.
[Guest]: He just, through experience, he's figured out that state coercion
[Guest]: has really led to the misery of farmers.
[Guest]: And instead of treating the symptoms the way most of the elites
[Guest]: want to treat just the loans or just the subsidies,
[Guest]: he has really thought about the core problem,
[Guest]: which is that farmers are denied choice.
[Guest]: And he was so eloquent about it. He is by far my most favorite guest.
[Amit Varma]: No, and you know, it's interesting.
[Amit Varma]: I remember WhatsApping you at the time in great excitement.
[Amit Varma]: Our good friend, Barun Mitra, had organized his farmer's conference
[Amit Varma]: in Deolali in Nasik, which had a bunch of these
[Amit Varma]: Shedkari Sangatana leaders who'd worked with Sharad Joshi.
[Amit Varma]: And he wanted Bharat to meet India, in his words.
[Amit Varma]: So he took a bunch of English-speaking Bombay people along,
[Amit Varma]: me being one of them.
[Amit Varma]: And the fascinating thing I realized there was, you know,
[Amit Varma]: I always had the impression, which I now realize to be mistaken,
[Amit Varma]: that our ideas, being so counterintuitive,
[Amit Varma]: will necessarily be the ideas of the elite.
[Amit Varma]: And when I got there, I realized that, my God, that, you know,
[Amit Varma]: the way we view the world, many of these farmer leaders,
[Amit Varma]: like Gunwant Patil ji, Manvendra Kachole ji,
[Amit Varma]: and a bunch of, you know, really fine, deep thinkers,
[Amit Varma]: the way we view the world is pretty common,
[Amit Varma]: in the sense we've arrived at the same place, but in different ways.
[Amit Varma]: I've arrived at there by finding these ideas in books,
[Amit Varma]: thinking, ha, this makes sense, and then applying them to the real world,
[Amit Varma]: and over a period of time, they kind of get validated.
[Amit Varma]: These guys don't care about the books.
[Amit Varma]: These guys have seen, you know, life playing out and affecting them,
[Amit Varma]: and from that, they've come to these, what we would call libertarian conclusions,
[Amit Varma]: that, you know, they've reached Hayak without reaching Hayak,
[Amit Varma]: they've reached Friedman without reading Friedman,
[Amit Varma]: which is just, which was incredibly fascinating,
[Amit Varma]: and that was the one Hindi episode I did,
[Amit Varma]: because I just wanted him to be comfortable,
[Guest]: and what did you think of my Hindi?
[Guest]: Your Hindi is terrible.
[Unknown]: Okay, don't say that.
[Unknown]: I grew up in Delhi, so I have high standards.
[Guest]: Gunwan ji's Hindi is excellent.
[Unknown]: Obviously.
[Guest]: So I really enjoyed that episode.
[Guest]: I know for some of your listeners,
[Guest]: the Hindi language bar might have been a bit difficult,
[Guest]: but I was very comfortable listening to him,
[Guest]: and in fact, the thing that both of us picked up on,
[Guest]: which is that they think of these ideas in a non-academic way,
[Guest]: I think that might be more productive than the way we think about it,
[Guest]: because we think about it in a particular box,
[Guest]: parts dependent on the literature that we have read,
[Guest]: and then what we have read, we try to apply to the real world
[Guest]: that we see in front of us.
[Guest]: Theirs are just so naturally intuitive and seamless,
[Guest]: I think the way they communicate those ideas
[Guest]: might just be a tad better than what we are trying to do.
[Amit Varma]: That's the one big thing I got from the episode.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, it's pretty mind-blowing also,
[Amit Varma]: because, you know, I got so much feedback after that episode,
[Amit Varma]: saying that, wow, this has completely opened my mind,
[Amit Varma]: I didn't know these were the problems,
[Amit Varma]: and I was thinking that, okay, for like 15 years,
[Amit Varma]: I've been writing columns about exactly these problems,
[Amit Varma]: but yeah, it's completely different when he says it in his voice,
[Amit Varma]: in his language, and he contextualizes it
[Amit Varma]: in his own personal experience and pain,
[Amit Varma]: and that reaches out and makes a difference.
[Guest]: Yeah, and he was a very natural guest,
[Guest]: like all the emotion was right there,
[Guest]: his frustrations with the government,
[Guest]: his frustrations when he was describing BT cotton,
[Guest]: and how he was so thrilled that they did it on the sly,
[Guest]: and then it became so big that they couldn't quite ban it,
[Guest]: and so he was a very natural sort of,
[Guest]: so I really loved him, I loved Gunwanji.
[Amit Varma]: That was episode 86, and before you tell me your other favorites,
[Amit Varma]: I got to tell you that your first episode with me
[Amit Varma]: was Right to Property, right?
[Unknown]: Yeah.
[Amit Varma]: And that was a transitional episode for me,
[Amit Varma]: in the sense that before that,
[Amit Varma]: my impression was I have to hook people onto the show,
[Amit Varma]: and I'd been told that the data shows
[Amit Varma]: that about 20-minute interviews are the way to go,
[Amit Varma]: and that's your sweet spot,
[Amit Varma]: and people don't like to listen to more than that,
[Amit Varma]: and I used to aim for 20 minutes,
[Amit Varma]: which is mind-blowing to think of it now.
[Amit Varma]: I even had a 10-minute episode with Mohit Satyanand.
[Amit Varma]: I remember.
[Amit Varma]: Which is a miniature masterpiece, but it's a miniature.
[Amit Varma]: And then my episode with you on Right to Property
[Amit Varma]: went for an hour, and I thought,
[Amit Varma]: what a nice conversation this was, you know,
[Amit Varma]: and why am I doing 20 minutes?
[Amit Varma]: And then as I became a regular podcast listener myself,
[Amit Varma]: and started binging on other interview shows like Sam Harris and so on,
[Amit Varma]: I realized that, hey, most people who listen to podcasts regularly
[Amit Varma]: listen at double speed.
[Amit Varma]: So if you have a 20-minute show,
[Amit Varma]: by the time you've put on your shoes to go jogging outside,
[Amit Varma]: the 10 minutes are gone.
[Amit Varma]: That's double speed.
[Amit Varma]: It's all over.
[Amit Varma]: And the kind of podcast I would crave to listen to
[Amit Varma]: would be two-hour conversations, three-hour conversations,
[Amit Varma]: like Sam Harris sometimes, Joe Rogan,
[Amit Varma]: or Dan Carlin's Great Hardcore History podcast,
[Amit Varma]: and I thought I need to do more of those,
[Amit Varma]: and we reached a stage where now I aim for a minimum of an hour,
[Amit Varma]: otherwise I feel like it wasn't rewarding enough.
[Amit Varma]: And...
[Guest]: My podcast listening habits are similar.
[Guest]: So I listen to the podcast on the subway
[Guest]: when I'm walking the dog or in the car,
[Guest]: and I thought I was the exception,
[Guest]: that I like really long conversations.
[Guest]: I remember when we did the Right to Property,
[Guest]: I even said, should we break at some point?
[Guest]: Do we need to re-record something?
[Guest]: And later my husband pointed out to me the same thing that you said,
[Guest]: that it's double speed, and he said traffic is so bad in most places
[Guest]: that it's not like you're getting anywhere from point A to point B in 10 minutes.
[Guest]: So most people are stuck in a car or some kind of mass public transit
[Guest]: for at least 40, 45 minutes,
[Guest]: and that seems to be an unexpected boon for podcasters.
[Amit Varma]: Traffic is our killer app.
[Guest]: Or our friend.
[Amit Varma]: Traffic is our friend.
[Guest]: So what are the other episodes which...
[Guest]: So, you know, I mean, some personally,
[Guest]: like I think the one you did with Vishwanath,
[Amit Varma]: the Zen Rain Man episode on...
[Amit Varma]: Vishwanath Sikandar, yeah.
[Guest]: Yeah, he was really great.
[Guest]: I don't know very much about water conservation in India.
[Guest]: I know in general about common pool resource problems, right?
[Guest]: The tragedy of commons that we keep talking about.
[Guest]: So the stuff that he spoke about both academically resonated with me
[Guest]: and also like I've grown up in India, right?
[Guest]: We've all had the days when your mother said
[Guest]: take half a bucket of water and you're done.
[Guest]: So it just resonated with me,
[Guest]: but the types of ideas he talked about, again,
[Guest]: were just so ground up, no pun intended,
[Guest]: and so sort of counterintuitive but very practical.
[Guest]: And his general theme that we need to keep it local
[Guest]: and involve local communities,
[Guest]: I think that is an underappreciated idea in India.
[Guest]: We want Sarkar to do everything
[Guest]: and Sarkar usually means some centralized power.
[Guest]: And even in politics, we usually look to who is the prime minister
[Guest]: and not who is your municipal corporator or something like that.
[Guest]: So I think that episode really hooked me on.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, how was the chatting with him?
[Amit Varma]: It was great.
[Amit Varma]: Our mutual friend Gautam John put me on to him
[Amit Varma]: and Gautam said you've got to speak to him
[Amit Varma]: and obviously I take Gautam.
[Amit Varma]: I mean, if Gautam is recommending someone,
[Amit Varma]: then that person is good.
[Amit Varma]: So I requested an interview, fixed it up,
[Amit Varma]: he got there, I didn't know what to expect.
[Amit Varma]: So that was one of those episodes which surprised me
[Amit Varma]: in the depth of insight that he came up with
[Amit Varma]: and which surprised a lot of people
[Amit Varma]: because it's always continuously got great feedback since then.
[Amit Varma]: And yeah, that was really good.
[Amit Varma]: I mean, sometimes what happens is that
[Amit Varma]: you have a guest from whom you expect a lot
[Amit Varma]: and things just don't work out.
[Amit Varma]: Maybe sometimes you can't get into that easy conversational flow
[Amit Varma]: that you crave during a conversation like this
[Amit Varma]: and that doesn't happen
[Amit Varma]: and sometimes they don't open up enough
[Amit Varma]: and the stars don't align.
[Amit Varma]: And sometimes you have a guest
[Amit Varma]: you have like no expectations from at all
[Guest]: and boom, you end up with something that's kind of soul-marketing.
[Guest]: Yeah, he was really, I mean, he was so great.
[Guest]: And you know, the simple idea,
[Guest]: we don't think of water that way,
[Guest]: but water is renewable.
[Guest]: It replenishes every day.
[Guest]: So the things that he's talking about
[Guest]: are not even long-term,
[Guest]: you know, we need to do this over a period of 10 years or 20 years.
[Guest]: You'll see the results quite quickly.
[Guest]: So even from the start of his ideas
[Guest]: to when we get better water resources
[Guest]: for the local community,
[Guest]: I think it was very valuable.
[Guest]: I really hope his ideas
[Guest]: get a bigger market
[Guest]: and can convert into action
[Amit Varma]: in more places.
[Amit Varma]: Which is something you were kind of pointing out
[Amit Varma]: earlier when we were having lunch before this
[Amit Varma]: and you were having phool kopi short shared over Calcutta,
[Amit Varma]: which the chef had to make specially for us
[Amit Varma]: because it's off-menu.
[Amit Varma]: And you were pointing out that
[Amit Varma]: the episodes which kind of resonated with you
[Amit Varma]: were the ones with that single big idea
[Guest]: which can actually make a difference.
[Guest]: Yeah, I really, I mean,
[Guest]: this one I'm biased because Alex Tabarrok
[Guest]: is one of my former professors and a co-author
[Guest]: and, you know, you've met him.
[Guest]: He's just one of the most brilliant economists
[Amit Varma]: and insightful people.
[Amit Varma]: Such a lovely man, yeah.
[Amit Varma]: Very lovely and generous.
[Guest]: Yes, and also very lovely and generous,
[Guest]: but also like just one of the best
[Guest]: insightful economists that I have met.
[Guest]: I use his and Tyler Cowen's book
[Guest]: in my principal's class.
[Guest]: It's full of gems like this.
[Amit Varma]: Your reference was FSI episode.
[Amit Varma]: Exactly.
[Guest]: He did two.
[Amit Varma]: He did one on rent control and one on FSI.
[Guest]: I think rent control,
[Guest]: we've all been hammering away at it.
[Guest]: And if you live in Mumbai,
[Guest]: it's really hard to be a fan of rent control.
[Guest]: With the FSI episode,
[Guest]: what I really loved about it,
[Guest]: and this you see in a lot of Alex's work,
[Guest]: it's, I mean, after all,
[Guest]: their site is called Marginal Revolution,
[Guest]: a small step to change the world, right?
[Guest]: So it's a small idea
[Guest]: which could completely change many things.
[Guest]: It can change the architecture of Bombay, right?
[Guest]: We live tall instead of live broad, right?
[Guest]: We live in smaller clusters.
[Guest]: We think of distance very differently.
[Guest]: We may start walking to work
[Guest]: instead of taking a car to work, right?
[Guest]: Prices may drop,
[Guest]: so there's more mixed living
[Guest]: in the sense that, you know,
[Guest]: the person who comes to drive my car,
[Guest]: the person who comes to do the housekeeping at home
[Guest]: doesn't have to travel an hour in a local train
[Guest]: to come and work in our homes
[Guest]: or something like that.
[Guest]: So, you know, it becomes more affordable.
[Guest]: And then, you know, cities,
[Guest]: as a landscape, they generate ideas.
[Guest]: Cities are basically labor markets
[Guest]: and they're innovation markets.
[Guest]: What kind of ideas can be generated
[Guest]: if you're not spending all our time
[Guest]: in individual silos and cars on the road
[Guest]: and instead spending it in communities,
[Guest]: spending it in public areas,
[Guest]: spending it walking around,
[Guest]: spending it listening to podcasts
[Guest]: and in closer proximity with other people?
[Guest]: I think there's also a huge equalizing factor.
[Guest]: If you look at cities like Hong Kong and New York,
[Guest]: which are tall as opposed to sprawled out,
[Guest]: everyone at every income level
[Guest]: has to interact with each other.
[Guest]: I go to the Metropolitan Opera,
[Guest]: which is a fairly elite sort of interest,
[Guest]: even in New York.
[Guest]: And the moment the opera is over,
[Guest]: everyone is walking out to the same subway.
[Guest]: And there is something very lovely about that
[Guest]: in that we genuinely,
[Guest]: despite our income and class differences,
[Guest]: we can genuinely interact with each other,
[Guest]: make eye contact
[Guest]: when we're in the same subway compartment
[Guest]: and things like that.
[Guest]: So a simple thing like changing the FSI
[Guest]: can have very long-term consequences
[Guest]: on the kind of spontaneous order
[Amit Varma]: that emerges for the lack of a better word.
[Amit Varma]: I'll just sum it up for my listeners
[Amit Varma]: by saying FSI basically is how tall
[Amit Varma]: you're allowed to make your buildings.
[Amit Varma]: And Bombay has a very low FSI of around 1.
[Amit Varma]: And a lot of cities around the world
[Amit Varma]: have FSIs of 15, 25, 30, and so on,
[Amit Varma]: like New York and Hong Kong.
[Amit Varma]: And Alex's point can be summed up
[Amit Varma]: in just three words.
[Amit Varma]: Reclaim the sky.
[Amit Varma]: You know, we are restricted
[Amit Varma]: by how much land we have access to.
[Amit Varma]: Don't think of reclaiming the sea
[Amit Varma]: or reclaiming land.
[Amit Varma]: Reclaim the sky.
[Amit Varma]: Just build upwards.
[Amit Varma]: And all the typical objections fall apart,
[Amit Varma]: which he sort of addresses
[Amit Varma]: in that great episode,
[Amit Varma]: which was one of the early 20-minute episodes.
[Amit Varma]: And now I look back on that
[Amit Varma]: and I'm thinking that, damn it,
[Amit Varma]: you know, Alex Tabarrok came with me
[Amit Varma]: and sat where you are sitting twice.
[Amit Varma]: And I spoke to him for 20 minutes each.
[Guest]: What a waste.
[Amit Varma]: I'm sure he'll give you more time.
[Guest]: He's an incredibly lovely and generous person.
[Guest]: So the FSI was one of those ideas.
[Guest]: You know, another one of them
[Guest]: was the television price controls episode
[Amit Varma]: that you did with Ashok Malik.
[Guest]: And, you know, we all complain
[Guest]: about how terrible television is.
[Guest]: Like, it just caters to the lowest common denominator.
[Guest]: We all complain about how terrible
[Guest]: news channels are, right, on TV.
[Guest]: And it's just this screaming match
[Guest]: with even the screen,
[Guest]: the amount of information
[Guest]: and the number of tickers going on.
[Guest]: It's like my stress levels increase
[Guest]: the moment I watch television.
[Guest]: And the quality is pretty poor.
[Guest]: There is no real analysis.
[Guest]: There's no insight.
[Guest]: It's a screaming match.
[Guest]: There's a lot of misrepresentation of facts.
[Guest]: And Ashok Malik basically told us
[Guest]: that it's not cultural.
[Guest]: It's a problem of licensing and price controls.
[Guest]: And the same way it produces poor quality food
[Guest]: or poor quality apartments in Mumbai,
[Guest]: it is producing poor quality television.
[Amit Varma]: And Ashok's point fundamentally to sum it up
[Amit Varma]: was that, look, it's very easy to blame
[Amit Varma]: private operators, right?
[Amit Varma]: Hey, television is so bad.
[Amit Varma]: It's not the state's fault.
[Amit Varma]: But actually what happens...
[Amit Varma]: See, my Hindi is so good.
[Amit Varma]: But actually what happens is that
[Amit Varma]: the state carries out price controls
[Amit Varma]: in terms of they have sold these licenses
[Amit Varma]: at such exorbitant amounts
[Amit Varma]: and therefore stopped people coming into the market
[Amit Varma]: that the guys who've paid so much money
[Amit Varma]: for these licenses have no option
[Amit Varma]: but to cater to the lowest common denominator,
[Amit Varma]: which is why you'll see Arnab
[Amit Varma]: and variations of Arnab on all the news channels.
[Amit Varma]: It's a screaming match.
[Amit Varma]: And you don't have space for cultivating niches
[Amit Varma]: or going into nuance.
[Amit Varma]: Or subscription television.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, because once you pay that kind of money,
[Amit Varma]: you don't have a choice.
[Amit Varma]: It's a structural problem created by the state.
[Amit Varma]: So don't blame your bad television on Republic TV.
[Amit Varma]: Republic TV is a symptom.
[Guest]: I think that's...
[Guest]: Another symptom is that you're listening to this
[Unknown]: as a podcast and not on radio.
[Guest]: This could be a lovely radio show,
[Guest]: but radio stations only want to play Bollywood music
[Guest]: because, again, that's the largest market
[Guest]: that you can have.
[Amit Varma]: And that's the point Amit Doshi actually keeps making,
[Amit Varma]: where he says that if you look at New York,
[Guest]: you have so many dozens of FM stations.
[Guest]: Excellent radio.
[Amit Varma]: Because it's cheap.
[Amit Varma]: So you can cater to every niche,
[Amit Varma]: you can cater to every taste,
[Amit Varma]: you can experiment.
[Amit Varma]: Over here, you have a few licenses sold
[Amit Varma]: for many whatever it is,
[Amit Varma]: tens, hundreds of crores.
[Amit Varma]: You have to recover that money.
[Amit Varma]: You have no option.
[Amit Varma]: You have to go lowest common.
[Guest]: Yeah.
[Guest]: And the lowest common here is,
[Guest]: you know, jokes and Bollywood.
[Unknown]: Yeah.
[Guest]: With a few traffic updates thrown in
[Guest]: or sprinkled in, right?
[Guest]: And it's the same old, same old, right?
[Guest]: The Gabbar's voice.
[Guest]: And yesterday I was thinking,
[Guest]: the number of RD Burman riffs,
[Guest]: like we don't even have new music
[Guest]: on these radio shows, right?
[Guest]: The number of times like some RD Burman riffs
[Guest]: plays on radio,
[Guest]: this is all because that is what is
[Guest]: instantly recognizable.
[Guest]: You're sitting in the car most of the times
[Guest]: when you're listening to the radio.
[Guest]: And you want people to tune in,
[Guest]: which means they have to have
[Guest]: either celebrity interviews
[Guest]: or something like this.
[Guest]: And your show could be wonderful on radio.
[Guest]: Like it could get this fantastic market
[Guest]: if it could be broadcast over radio waves,
[Guest]: but it simply cannot be done.
[Guest]: And the problem is exactly the same
[Guest]: as what Ashok Malik discussed with television.
[Amit Varma]: I actually think it's better this way
[Amit Varma]: in the sense that,
[Amit Varma]: you know, the future of television,
[Amit Varma]: for example,
[Amit Varma]: is not appointment viewing,
[Amit Varma]: it's streaming,
[Amit Varma]: it's on-demand viewing.
[Amit Varma]: And similarly,
[Amit Varma]: so what Netflix is to Star Plus,
[Amit Varma]: I would say that IBM podcasts
[Amit Varma]: or podcasts in general
[Amit Varma]: are to FM radio.
[Guest]: Fair enough, but I'm an economist.
[Guest]: All cost is opportunity cost.
[Guest]: You could have been a radio show host
[Guest]: 15 years ago,
[Guest]: and we could have had a huge market
[Guest]: of people who are educated in policy.
[Guest]: Which never happened.
[Guest]: And not just you,
[Guest]: there could have been multiple variations
[Unknown]: of this kind of show,
[Guest]: which never happened.
[Guest]: And we had to wait for one,
[Guest]: technology to help us decentralize the medium.
[Guest]: And two,
[Guest]: we had to wait for something like Jio,
[Guest]: which has put data on every phone.
[Guest]: Otherwise it would have only been
[Guest]: a rich man's play thing, right?
[Amit Varma]: Cell phone and data connection.
[Amit Varma]: And I could actually have made some money.
[Guest]: And you could have made some money.
[Guest]: I did offer to buy lunch.
[Amit Varma]: You did offer to buy lunch
[Amit Varma]: but we cannot have our guests
[Amit Varma]: buying our host lunch.
[Guest]: We are very feminist on this show.
[Guest]: So we also offer to buy lunch.
[Amit Varma]: You offered,
[Amit Varma]: but the offer was declined.
[Amit Varma]: When I come to New York next,
[Amit Varma]: perhaps as a starving refugee,
[Amit Varma]: you can buy me a meal at the time.
[Guest]: I don't think Trump's government
[Unknown]: is taking in refugees.
[Guest]: You might be able to come in as a podcaster.
[Guest]: You might have better luck with that.
[Amit Varma]: Starving podcaster.
[Amit Varma]: Make podcasting great again.
[Guest]: Then a couple of other episodes.
[Guest]: Since you mentioned starving podcaster,
[Guest]: one idea which I think can have a big impact
[Guest]: is the dhanwapsi idea
[Guest]: that Rajesh Jain talked about, right?
[Guest]: I mean, the idea is pretty simple.
[Guest]: It is a direct transfer of public wealth,
[Guest]: but we keep saying this is our wealth.
[Guest]: These are public sources,
[Guest]: but they are not controlled by us.
[Guest]: They're controlled by representation of us,
[Guest]: which is the government.
[Guest]: So they really become the play thing
[Guest]: of those few people in power,
[Guest]: whether it is Indian forests,
[Guest]: Indian mines, Indian roads, Indian land.
[Guest]: I mean, we're in Mumbai.
[Guest]: Half of the town part of Mumbai,
[Guest]: the southern part of Mumbai,
[Guest]: is state land, right?
[Guest]: Whether it's the port
[Guest]: or whether it's all these LIC buildings
[Guest]: and all these old buildings.
[Guest]: And that's a lot of locked up value
[Guest]: which the state has no business holding on to.
[Guest]: And Rajesh Jain's simple idea is
[Guest]: we need the state to divest this wealth
[Guest]: and put it in a fund
[Guest]: and transfer it one time
[Guest]: to every single family in India.
[Guest]: And it has to be equal.
[Guest]: It has to be non-discriminatory.
[Guest]: And it is really the people's wealth
[Guest]: and people will know how to spend it better.
[Amit Varma]: Right?
[Amit Varma]: That was an interesting episode in the sense
[Amit Varma]: my episode with Rajesh was two hours long.
[Amit Varma]: My longest so far,
[Amit Varma]: but hopefully I'll have many more
[Amit Varma]: which are much longer.
[Amit Varma]: But that was two hours long
[Amit Varma]: and everybody said it was too short.
[Amit Varma]: I wanted more of it,
[Amit Varma]: which is uniformly.
[Amit Varma]: And the thing is, you know,
[Amit Varma]: like I've told Rajesh
[Amit Varma]: and if he's listening to this,
[Amit Varma]: I know he won't mind my saying it,
[Amit Varma]: but I don't really think
[Amit Varma]: his specific short-term plans
[Amit Varma]: or what he's doing with Dhanwapsya
[Amit Varma]: are going to work at all.
[Amit Varma]: It's like almost a fool's dream.
[Amit Varma]: But where I appreciate what he's...
[Amit Varma]: I used it as a phrase,
[Amit Varma]: I'm not calling him a fool.
[Amit Varma]: Far from that.
[Amit Varma]: But what is important about the venture,
[Amit Varma]: nevertheless,
[Amit Varma]: is to make that conceptual breakthrough.
[Amit Varma]: Because most people just think
[Amit Varma]: that all the wealth that they have
[Amit Varma]: is the wealth that they have, you know.
[Amit Varma]: If they're poor, they're poor.
[Amit Varma]: But what Rajesh is trying to get across to you
[Amit Varma]: is that, look,
[Amit Varma]: our public wealth is so much
[Amit Varma]: that every individual is actually worth,
[Amit Varma]: you know, 50 lakhs
[Amit Varma]: or even more than that.
[Amit Varma]: And all of that is being wasted.
[Amit Varma]: And it's time to give some of it
[Amit Varma]: back to the people
[Amit Varma]: instead of just lying around.
[Amit Varma]: Especially in a poor country like ours,
[Amit Varma]: where, you know,
[Amit Varma]: poverty is still a problem
[Amit Varma]: we are trying to tackle 71 years later.
[Amit Varma]: So just conceptually in terms of
[Amit Varma]: realizing that the government
[Amit Varma]: is not a separate, mybop entity
[Amit Varma]: and what it has is what it has.
[Amit Varma]: Realizing that, no,
[Amit Varma]: the government is your servant
[Amit Varma]: and what we call public wealth
[Amit Varma]: is actually our wealth.
[Amit Varma]: It's our debt capital, so to say.
[Guest]: No, I'm with you on that.
[Guest]: I am in the business of ideas
[Guest]: and not so much implementation.
[Guest]: So I think about it
[Guest]: in terms of the value of ideas
[Guest]: and not how quickly
[Guest]: this can turn into action necessarily.
[Guest]: And there are ideas
[Guest]: for whom the time may not have come yet,
[Guest]: which are not popular enough.
[Guest]: But nevertheless,
[Guest]: I think this is something
[Guest]: worth thinking about.
[Guest]: And even if Dhan Vapasi
[Guest]: by itself doesn't happen,
[Guest]: the change in mindset
[Guest]: that this is our wealth,
[Guest]: they simply control it
[Guest]: and we need to take back the control,
[Guest]: I think that idea is very powerful.
[Guest]: Right?
[Guest]: Whether we redistribute 15 lakhs
[Guest]: or 50 lakhs
[Guest]: or whatever the number is
[Guest]: or how it is done
[Guest]: and whether it's an entitlement
[Guest]: or a transfer,
[Guest]: those are things, you know,
[Guest]: which are less interesting.
[Guest]: But I think that a simple idea
[Guest]: is so powerful
[Guest]: that this is really our wealth
[Guest]: and it must be returned
[Guest]: to us in some way.
[Guest]: It's been taken away from us.
[Guest]: I don't think Indians
[Guest]: think that way.
[Guest]: Right?
[Guest]: It's usually government's wealth
[Guest]: and we are clearly
[Guest]: not participants in the government
[Guest]: because they only think
[Guest]: of citizens come elections.
[Guest]: Absolutely.
[Guest]: Another big idea, I think,
[Guest]: which has a huge impact
[Guest]: and India really needs
[Guest]: is the episode that you did
[Guest]: with Parth Shah.
[Guest]: He's another old friend,
[Guest]: a common friend of ours
[Guest]: and I think what Parth is doing
[Guest]: with the right to education
[Guest]: and school choice
[Guest]: is extremely valuable
[Guest]: and I think the two-fold idea,
[Guest]: you know,
[Guest]: one that the right to education
[Guest]: is simply driving out
[Guest]: the private market
[Guest]: because it's trying to...
[Guest]: The Right to Education Act
[Guest]: essentially defines
[Guest]: all education goods as inputs.
[Guest]: Right?
[Guest]: What is a good school?
[Guest]: A good school is one
[Guest]: which has a playground,
[Guest]: which has bathrooms,
[Guest]: which has windows of this size
[Guest]: and which has a midday meal
[Guest]: and, you know,
[Guest]: so on and so forth.
[Guest]: According to me,
[Guest]: a good school is one
[Guest]: where the children learn
[Unknown]: and I have read
[Guest]: the Right to Education Act
[Guest]: and there's not a single
[Guest]: learning outcome mentioned
[Guest]: in the schedule.
[Guest]: Right?
[Guest]: So this mindset
[Guest]: that you can have a good school
[Guest]: only if it checks off
[Guest]: all these boxes
[Guest]: and it looks like a good school.
[Guest]: Right?
[Guest]: And this is, again,
[Guest]: typically a problem
[Guest]: of elites making policy.
[Guest]: They go to Norway or Sweden
[Guest]: or wherever
[Guest]: and see what good schools look like
[Guest]: and then they turn it into policy.
[Guest]: The trouble is
[Guest]: a lot of great learning takes place
[Guest]: in tiny budget schools
[Guest]: which cannot afford
[Guest]: windows sometimes,
[Guest]: which cannot afford,
[Guest]: you know,
[Guest]: a good teacher-student ratio
[Guest]: or cannot afford
[Guest]: a good student-to-bathroom ratio
[Guest]: and so on and so forth.
[Guest]: And they are providing
[Guest]: a better service.
[Guest]: We know that for a fact
[Guest]: because poor parents
[Guest]: are willing to pay
[Guest]: a few thousand rupees
[Guest]: in these budget private schools
[Guest]: rather than send their children
[Guest]: to a free school.
[Guest]: I mean,
[Guest]: that is damning evidence.
[Guest]: I don't know what
[Guest]: could convince people more
[Guest]: that our public education system
[Guest]: is failing.
[Guest]: So I think Part's episode
[Guest]: on how the right to education
[Guest]: is really denying education
[Guest]: and how we need
[Guest]: to bring in school choice,
[Guest]: which is another one of the themes
[Guest]: you have spoken about
[Guest]: for more than a decade.
[Guest]: I think that's
[Guest]: a very powerful episode.
[Guest]: I think there is
[Guest]: an entire generation
[Guest]: which has been lost
[Guest]: and I think more generations
[Guest]: will be lost
[Guest]: unless we fix that.
[Amit Varma]: I think, again,
[Amit Varma]: there's a conceptual shift
[Amit Varma]: at the heart of what Part
[Amit Varma]: and people like Amit Chandra
[Amit Varma]: who also came on the show
[Guest]: talk about.
[Guest]: Amit's podcast was excellent,
[Amit Varma]: another one of my favorites.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, that was excellent
[Amit Varma]: and this sort of
[Amit Varma]: conceptual breakthrough
[Amit Varma]: they're trying to get at
[Amit Varma]: is that, look,
[Amit Varma]: the quality of education
[Amit Varma]: and the choices that is involved
[Amit Varma]: in where the kid goes to school
[Amit Varma]: should not be determined
[Amit Varma]: by a Maibab state
[Amit Varma]: but by the parents
[Amit Varma]: because they have
[Amit Varma]: the best incentives.
[Amit Varma]: Every parent wants his kid
[Amit Varma]: to get the best possible education
[Amit Varma]: because they want to
[Amit Varma]: get a better life, right?
[Amit Varma]: And one school vouchers,
[Amit Varma]: which I'm no longer convinced about
[Amit Varma]: despite being an advocate
[Amit Varma]: at one point,
[Amit Varma]: but I think there is,
[Amit Varma]: anyway,
[Amit Varma]: that's a different subject,
[Amit Varma]: but they're certainly better
[Amit Varma]: than the current system
[Amit Varma]: and what school vouchers do
[Amit Varma]: is they empower the parents
[Amit Varma]: and it's the parents
[Amit Varma]: who have the power
[Amit Varma]: of sending the kid
[Amit Varma]: wherever they want
[Amit Varma]: rather than the state.
[Amit Varma]: It's interesting
[Amit Varma]: because the episode
[Amit Varma]: I did with Parth
[Amit Varma]: was in my 20-minute format.
[Guest]: Yeah.
[Guest]: So it was really short.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, it was short.
[Amit Varma]: It was crisp.
[Amit Varma]: He was great.
[Amit Varma]: Very insightful.
[Amit Varma]: Didn't get a chance
[Amit Varma]: to go too deep.
[Unknown]: And the episode
[Amit Varma]: I did with Amit Chandra
[Amit Varma]: was more than an hour
[Amit Varma]: and that was great
[Amit Varma]: and he's been an activist.
[Amit Varma]: He's got boots on the ground.
[Amit Varma]: He's, you know,
[Amit Varma]: he's been an activist
[Amit Varma]: for education.
[Amit Varma]: He's someone
[Amit Varma]: who's actually got
[Amit Varma]: skin in the game.
[Amit Varma]: He liaises with politicians
[Amit Varma]: and all of that
[Amit Varma]: and tries to make a difference
[Guest]: in the world.
[Guest]: And the episode,
[Guest]: again,
[Guest]: when I was telling you
[Guest]: in the beginning,
[Guest]: it brought in so much context
[Guest]: about how schools
[Guest]: actually function
[Guest]: which I don't have
[Guest]: as an academic
[Guest]: who's only reading
[Guest]: the Right to Education Act
[Guest]: or the literature
[Guest]: and Amit's episode
[Guest]: helps you
[Guest]: very vividly
[Guest]: imagine
[Guest]: what these schools
[Guest]: look like,
[Guest]: what these students
[Guest]: go through,
[Guest]: what the parents
[Guest]: go through
[Guest]: and, you know,
[Unknown]: he made a fantastic
[Guest]: bootleggers and Baptists point
[Guest]: which is the rich schools
[Guest]: are the ones
[Guest]: who are actually
[Guest]: trying to shut down
[Guest]: private schools
[Guest]: because they're
[Guest]: direct competition
[Guest]: for being in violation
[Guest]: of the right to education.
[Guest]: Right?
[Guest]: So it's the teachers' unions
[Guest]: and the richer schools
[Guest]: or richer private schools
[Guest]: which are threatening
[Guest]: the poorer private schools
[Guest]: and the budget schools
[Guest]: and I think that was
[Guest]: a fantastic insight
[Guest]: that came out
[Guest]: in that episode.
[Amit Varma]: Which shows how
[Amit Varma]: sometimes the capitalist
[Amit Varma]: is the biggest enemy
[Amit Varma]: of free markets,
[Amit Varma]: cronyism,
[Amit Varma]: Zindabad.
[Guest]: Well,
[Guest]: it's bad incentives.
[Amit Varma]: Exactly.
[Amit Varma]: We have empowered
[Guest]: better budget schools
[Guest]: or richer school
[Guest]: entrepreneurs
[Guest]: with a terrible tool
[Guest]: called the
[Guest]: Right to Education Act
[Guest]: and now we are upset
[Guest]: that they are using it.
[Guest]: Yeah.
[Unknown]: So the problem is
[Guest]: with the regulation,
[Guest]: they would have just
[Guest]: competed in the market.
[Guest]: The very same people
[Guest]: would have competed
[Guest]: in the market
[Guest]: as they were
[Guest]: before the
[Guest]: Right to Education Act
[Guest]: instead of shutting down
[Guest]: their competition.
[Guest]: They would have made
[Amit Varma]: their product better.
[Amit Varma]: Right.
[Amit Varma]: Let's take a quick
[Amit Varma]: commercial break
[Amit Varma]: and we'll come back
[Amit Varma]: after the break
[Amit Varma]: not just to talk about
[Amit Varma]: the seen and the unseen
[Amit Varma]: but also to talk about
[Amit Varma]: what we have seen,
[Amit Varma]: what were the broad
[Amit Varma]: kind of trends
[Amit Varma]: that took place,
[Amit Varma]: what feelings do we
[Amit Varma]: have about it
[Amit Varma]: and also looking ahead
[Amit Varma]: at 2019
[Amit Varma]: which is just
[Unknown]: a few days from now.
[Unknown]: Thank you
[Unknown]: everyone
[Unknown]: for sending in
[Unknown]: emails and voice notes
[Unknown]: talking about
[Unknown]: their favorite moments
[Unknown]: from the show.
[Unknown]: We really appreciate that.
[Amit Varma]: And with that,
[Amit Varma]: let's continue
[Amit Varma]: with the show.
[Amit Varma]: Welcome back
[Amit Varma]: to the seen and the unseen.
[Amit Varma]: I'm sitting here
[Amit Varma]: with my most frequent guest
[Amit Varma]: so much so that
[Guest]: she's got frequent
[Guest]: guest points now,
[Guest]: Shruti Rajgopalan.
[Amit Varma]: I think when he said
[Amit Varma]: frequent,
[Amit Varma]: he meant favorite.
[Guest]: Favorite too.
[Amit Varma]: That's why
[Guest]: revealed preferences.
[Amit Varma]: That is true.
[Amit Varma]: Frequent is equal
[Amit Varma]: to favorite.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah,
[Amit Varma]: or no one else
[Amit Varma]: at this point
[Amit Varma]: that I have some
[Amit Varma]: really exciting episodes
[Amit Varma]: lined up.
[Amit Varma]: Next week is
[Amit Varma]: Steven Pinker
[Amit Varma]: on why the world
[Amit Varma]: is getting better.
[Amit Varma]: It's because 2018
[Amit Varma]: is finally getting over.
[Amit Varma]: And apart from that,
[Amit Varma]: I have Rebecca Goldstein,
[Amit Varma]: the philosopher
[Amit Varma]: on why philosophy
[Amit Varma]: is relevant
[Amit Varma]: to modern life.
[Amit Varma]: I have Gyan Prakash
[Amit Varma]: on the emergency
[Amit Varma]: of 1975
[Amit Varma]: and why it wasn't
[Amit Varma]: merely an aberration
[Amit Varma]: but written
[Amit Varma]: in the DNA
[Amit Varma]: of the Indian state.
[Amit Varma]: Fantastic episode
[Amit Varma]: which I really enjoyed.
[Amit Varma]: And finally,
[Amit Varma]: Tyler Cowen
[Amit Varma]: of Marginal Revolution
[Amit Varma]: talking about
[Amit Varma]: his new book
[Amit Varma]: of moral philosophy
[Amit Varma]: Stubborn Attachments.
[Amit Varma]: Again,
[Amit Varma]: he was very generous,
[Amit Varma]: gave me an hour
[Amit Varma]: to speak to me.
[Amit Varma]: Lovely episode.
[Amit Varma]: All those
[Amit Varma]: coming up,
[Amit Varma]: any of them,
[Amit Varma]: Shruti,
[Amit Varma]: could have been
[Guest]: my hundredth episode.
[Guest]: I'm flattered.
[Guest]: Yeah.
[Guest]: I think at zero price,
[Guest]: it's pretty easy
[Guest]: to be anybody's favorite.
[Amit Varma]: What is zero price?
[Amit Varma]: I don't understand it.
[Amit Varma]: Explain your economic
[Guest]: funda to me.
[Guest]: I'm not charging
[Guest]: high enough.
[Unknown]: Okay.
[Unknown]: So when you provide
[Guest]: something for free,
[Amit Varma]: there seems to be
[Amit Varma]: a very large market
[Amit Varma]: for it.
[Amit Varma]: Opportunity cost.
[Amit Varma]: Nothing is free.
[Amit Varma]: No such thing
[Amit Varma]: as a free lunch.
[Unknown]: I said zero price.
[Guest]: So,
[Guest]: no,
[Guest]: of all these,
[Guest]: I am,
[Guest]: I mean,
[Guest]: I'm excited for all
[Guest]: the episodes
[Guest]: that you're talking about.
[Guest]: And I,
[Guest]: of the lot,
[Amit Varma]: I've only read
[Amit Varma]: Stubborn Attachments
[Amit Varma]: and I mean,
[Guest]: the book
[Guest]: is self-recommending.
[Guest]: What did you think
[Guest]: of Stubborn Attachments?
[Guest]: I thought it was
[Guest]: a really long view
[Guest]: on things,
[Guest]: which is something
[Guest]: we don't get to do
[Guest]: on a daily basis
[Guest]: as academic economists,
[Guest]: right?
[Guest]: Not in the classroom,
[Guest]: not outside.
[Guest]: It's not like
[Guest]: academic publishing
[Guest]: has lent itself
[Guest]: very well to these
[Guest]: big long-term ideas.
[Guest]: And I think
[Guest]: only when you think
[Guest]: long the way
[Guest]: Tyler has attempted
[Guest]: to wrestle with
[Guest]: the big ideas
[Guest]: in his book,
[Guest]: that you get into
[Guest]: questions of ethics
[Guest]: and also what are
[Guest]: the trade-offs
[Guest]: you're willing
[Guest]: to make
[Guest]: in the long run.
[Guest]: Right?
[Guest]: And one great insight
[Guest]: is that
[Guest]: we must not compromise
[Guest]: long-run economic growth
[Guest]: because that seems
[Guest]: to take care
[Guest]: of a lot of other things.
[Guest]: So if there are
[Guest]: trade-offs to be made,
[Guest]: then, you know,
[Guest]: we really need
[Guest]: to think about
[Guest]: long-run economic growth
[Guest]: on the plus side
[Amit Varma]: of that trade-off.
[Amit Varma]: Are you a consequentialist?
[Amit Varma]: I'm a consequentialist.
[Amit Varma]: Right.
[Amit Varma]: We even discussed
[Amit Varma]: it at some point in time
[Amit Varma]: and I amend
[Amit Varma]: what I said in the intro.
[Amit Varma]: We don't agree
[Amit Varma]: on everything.
[Guest]: See?
[Amit Varma]: I think that's
[Amit Varma]: refreshing.
[Amit Varma]: That's refreshing.
[Amit Varma]: So, I mean,
[Amit Varma]: you know,
[Amit Varma]: one thing that
[Amit Varma]: I point out to people
[Amit Varma]: whenever, like,
[Amit Varma]: you often see that
[Amit Varma]: people will get
[Amit Varma]: infatuated with
[Amit Varma]: this new thinker
[Amit Varma]: or this new
[Amit Varma]: public intellectual
[Amit Varma]: and they'll quote
[Amit Varma]: all his works
[Amit Varma]: and they'll go crazy
[Amit Varma]: and they'll post
[Amit Varma]: like 10 posts
[Amit Varma]: on YouTube
[Amit Varma]: about that person
[Amit Varma]: and the way
[Amit Varma]: I look at it is
[Amit Varma]: that there isn't
[Amit Varma]: a single thinker
[Amit Varma]: in the world
[Amit Varma]: with whom I agree
[Amit Varma]: in total.
[Amit Varma]: You name anyone,
[Amit Varma]: all my favorites,
[Amit Varma]: I have no other
[Amit Varma]: admiration.
[Amit Varma]: And so,
[Amit Varma]: therefore,
[Amit Varma]: whenever someone
[Amit Varma]: tells me about
[Amit Varma]: someone who's
[Amit Varma]: an intellectual
[Amit Varma]: hero of theirs,
[Amit Varma]: my question always
[Amit Varma]: is, okay,
[Guest]: tell me where
[Guest]: you disagree
[Guest]: with them
[Guest]: because
[Guest]: otherwise
[Guest]: it's religious
[Guest]: faith.
[Guest]: Where do I
[Guest]: disagree?
[Guest]: Not too many
[Amit Varma]: places.
[Guest]: I might disagree
[Guest]: in terms of
[Guest]: details.
[Guest]: Right?
[Guest]: So, for instance,
[Amit Varma]: right now
[Guest]: I didn't actually
[Guest]: agree with
[Guest]: him.
[Guest]: Yeah.
[Guest]: Because Tyler
[Guest]: is an intellectual
[Amit Varma]: hero.
[Amit Varma]: But let's not
[Amit Varma]: get into this
[Amit Varma]: since this was
[Amit Varma]: a rhetorical point.
[Amit Varma]: He's an intellectual
[Amit Varma]: hero of mine
[Amit Varma]: also in the sense
[Amit Varma]: that every time
[Amit Varma]: I read him,
[Amit Varma]: I feel like
[Amit Varma]: my brain cells
[Guest]: are getting
[Guest]: activated and
[Amit Varma]: I'm getting
[Amit Varma]: smarter.
[Amit Varma]: But a lot
[Amit Varma]: of places
[Amit Varma]: I can't
[Amit Varma]: quite agree.
[Amit Varma]: I wouldn't
[Amit Varma]: say disagree
[Guest]: because
[Guest]: disagreement also
[Guest]: means it's
[Guest]: not so much
[Guest]: disagreement
[Guest]: but that my
[Guest]: ideas may not
[Guest]: fit particularly
[Unknown]: well in that
[Guest]: framework of
[Guest]: thinking.
[Guest]: Right?
[Guest]: Or I might be
[Unknown]: trying to solve
[Guest]: a completely
[Guest]: different problem
[Guest]: than what is
[Guest]: being solved.
[Guest]: This is not
[Guest]: just about
[Guest]: Tyler's book
[Guest]: but just
[Guest]: more generally
[Guest]: about the
[Guest]: people one
[Guest]: likes to
[Guest]: read and
[Guest]: is inspired
[Guest]: by.
[Guest]: But I agree
[Guest]: with you.
[Guest]: Right?
[Guest]: Or in terms
[Guest]: of point of
[Guest]: view, I think
[Guest]: we have a
[Guest]: very rich point
[Guest]: of view because
[Guest]: we've grown up
[Guest]: in India.
[Guest]: It's a fundamentally
[Guest]: entangled system.
[Guest]: Right?
[Guest]: We look at
[Guest]: problems which
[Guest]: are much more
[Guest]: naughty and
[Guest]: therefore much
[Amit Varma]: more delicious
[Amit Varma]: and interesting
[Amit Varma]: to solve.
[Amit Varma]: By naughty
[Amit Varma]: you meant
[Amit Varma]: K-N-O-T-T-Y.
[Guest]: A bunch of
[Guest]: listeners are
[Guest]: wondering what
[Guest]: is she talking
[Guest]: about?
[Guest]: Yeah.
[Unknown]: It's
[Guest]: K-N-O-T-T-Y.
[Unknown]: So yeah, I
[Guest]: think the
[Guest]: problems here
[Guest]: are much more
[Guest]: interesting and
[Guest]: we have sort
[Guest]: of grown up
[Guest]: with it.
[Guest]: We take a lot
[Guest]: for granted.
[Guest]: One thing I'm
[Guest]: really surprised
[Guest]: by in India is
[Guest]: actually that
[Unknown]: crime rates are
[Guest]: so low.
[Guest]: India genuinely
[Guest]: makes me believe
[Guest]: in the goodness
[Guest]: of other people.
[Guest]: Even such
[Guest]: low state
[Guest]: capacity and
[Guest]: such poor
[Guest]: enforcement of
[Amit Varma]: law.
[Amit Varma]: Right?
[Amit Varma]: It's
[Unknown]: emergent
[Unknown]: order.
[Amit Varma]: In the
[Amit Varma]: sense that
[Amit Varma]: with India
[Amit Varma]: I've always
[Amit Varma]: felt that
[Amit Varma]: there is no
[Amit Varma]: rule of law
[Amit Varma]: per se.
[Guest]: It's not
[Guest]: because of
[Guest]: the rule of
[Guest]: law enforced
[Guest]: by the state
[Guest]: that we are
[Guest]: largely a
[Guest]: law-abiding
[Guest]: society.
[Guest]: This is
[Guest]: society
[Guest]: regulating
[Guest]: itself.
[Guest]: Well it's
[Guest]: a society
[Guest]: regulating
[Guest]: itself but
[Guest]: when was
[Guest]: that
[Guest]: the
[Guest]: first
[Guest]: time
[Guest]: that
[Guest]: India
[Unknown]: was
[Guest]: a
[Guest]: law
[Guest]: abiding
[Guest]: society?
[Guest]: I
[Guest]: don't
[Guest]: know.
[Guest]: I
[Guest]: don't
[Guest]: know.
[Guest]: I
[Guest]: don't
[Unknown]: know.
[Guest]: I
[Guest]: don't
[Guest]: know.
[Guest]: I
[Guest]: don't
[Guest]: know.
[Guest]: I
[Guest]: don't
[Guest]: know.
[Guest]: I
[Amit Varma]: don't
[Amit Varma]: know.
[Amit Varma]: I
[Amit Varma]: don't
[Amit Varma]: know.
[Amit Varma]: I
[Amit Varma]: have
[Amit Varma]: no
[Amit Varma]: clue.
[Amit Varma]: I
[Amit Varma]: don't
[Amit Varma]: know.
[Amit Varma]: I
[Amit Varma]: don't
[Amit Varma]: know.
[Amit Varma]: I
[Amit Varma]: don't
[Amit Varma]: know.
[Amit Varma]: But
[Amit Varma]: I
[Amit Varma]: really
[Amit Varma]: don't
[Amit Varma]: know.
[Amit Varma]: I
[Amit Varma]: don't
[Amit Varma]: know.
[Amit Varma]: I
[Amit Varma]: respect their consent and this applies to all your personal relationships.
[Amit Varma]: So the way you behave to the world and relate to the world, you are broadly libertarian.
[Amit Varma]: But then when you extrapolate it to an abstract level, you start thinking like an engineer
[Amit Varma]: and you want to put different things in place.
[Guest]: Well, one is that and also I have very routinely heard people say, but I am good, what about
[Guest]: the other people who need to be controlled, right?
[Guest]: So we impose this, you know, that others are necessarily different from me.
[Guest]: This goes back to the school choice issue, right?
[Guest]: I've heard so many Delhi elite policy types talk about, but poor people don't know better.
[Amit Varma]: Right, which is just shocking.
[Guest]: They don't know where to send their children to school.
[Guest]: It's very condescending and patronizing.
[Guest]: Poor people know much more than us about the world, I think, because they navigate a very
[Guest]: different world, which is much, much more difficult.
[Guest]: But most importantly, they know about themselves, which is knowledge that we cannot have.
[Guest]: That knowledge is so subjective and so contextual.
[Guest]: It is not possible to replicate that.
[Guest]: I'll tell you an interesting story.
[Guest]: I read this in Dean Carlin's book.
[Guest]: So Dean Carlin is an economist and a policy person who wrote this book with a co-author.
[Guest]: The name is slipping my mind.
[Guest]: The book is called More Than Good Intentions, right?
[Guest]: And he's basically talking about all the randomized control trials and other kinds of research
[Guest]: that they've conducted in developing areas and some of the broad lessons that they've
[Guest]: learned.
[Guest]: There's a lovely story.
[Guest]: I think it's about a flower seller.
[Guest]: I think her name is Vijaya in the book.
[Guest]: And they talk about how, you know, they go to Vijaya and they explain this whole micro
[Guest]: credit thing.
[Guest]: And Vijaya's daily routine is as follows.
[Guest]: She goes in the market, you know, she wakes up in the market at four in the morning.
[Guest]: She'll go to the wholesale flower mandi.
[Guest]: Before that, she will stop on the way to the money lender and she will borrow money on
[Guest]: daily interest, which as you and I know, can be extremely, it's a very expensive way of
[Guest]: raising money.
[Guest]: So she will borrow money in the morning.
[Guest]: She will go to the mandi.
[Guest]: She will buy the flowers.
[Guest]: She will sell the flowers through the day.
[Guest]: Whatever additional money she makes, she will stop back.
[Guest]: You know, the money lender's right there.
[Guest]: She'll go back.
[Guest]: She will pay it back.
[Guest]: And with the remaining money, she will, you know, buy her daily groceries and so on.
[Guest]: And they did the math for her.
[Guest]: They sat down, they explained everything and they said, you know, we will give you some
[Guest]: micro credit.
[Guest]: But if you don't borrow every day, you save X percent in daily compounding interest, which
[Guest]: is very expensive way to do business.
[Guest]: And before the end of the week, you will be putting away 50 rupees.
[Guest]: By the end of three weeks, you will have 150 rupees.
[Guest]: And then that is enough for you to buy the flowers in the mandi on a daily basis.
[Guest]: So they laid it all out for her.
[Guest]: And she said, all that's fine, but I can't keep any money at home because my husband's
[Guest]: a drunk.
[Guest]: And the only way he can be disciplined is because he knows that the money lender's guys
[Guest]: will be after us if you don't pay the money lender back.
[Guest]: So we think that she needs to optimize on how she does her flower business.
[Guest]: But she's optimizing on three problems.
[Guest]: How to run her house, how to control her husband's alcoholism, and how to run a successful small,
[Guest]: you know, sort of, I don't know if you can call this a business, but a small entrepreneurial
[Guest]: venture of selling flowers daily outside the temple.
[Guest]: And we simply don't know what her optimizing function is, to use a typical economist term,
[Guest]: right?
[Guest]: If you don't know what it is that they're trying to optimize, how can you tell them
[Guest]: how to do it?
[Guest]: And that's why a lot of these patronizing people who sort of typically say, but they
[Guest]: don't know better.
[Guest]: You know, even if I had looked at Vijay, I'd be like, yeah, that's a terribly silly way
[Guest]: taking money on daily interest.
[Guest]: And my first assumption would have also been, maybe she doesn't know that there are other
[Guest]: alternatives, right?
[Guest]: That's our natural inclination.
[Guest]: All of us who have access to modern credit, we all have credit cards, we just paid for
[Guest]: our lunch with credit card and so on.
[Guest]: So that would be our natural inclination.
[Guest]: Our natural inclination is never to think that there is something about their circumstances
[Guest]: that they know so much more about that we can't possibly fathom.
[Guest]: And they must be doing what is best for themselves.
[Guest]: And this is not to say that we shouldn't have financial literacy or education programs and
[Guest]: so on, but they need to be the ones who apply the tools of financial literacy.
[Amit Varma]: We cannot do it for them.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah.
[Amit Varma]: You empower them with the knowledge and don't stand in judgment and say, oh, what are they
[Amit Varma]: doing?
[Amit Varma]: That is, I get it.
[Amit Varma]: It's a very poignant story though.
[Guest]: I mean, what is a way out for Vijaya then?
[Guest]: Well, I think socially we need to change.
[Guest]: I mean, one major problem for Vijaya, presumably, I don't know much about her life, but presumably
[Guest]: she can't get rid of her husband, which would be one way of solving the problem, right?
[Guest]: Another way is we need to have a better credit system, which is more competitive at that
[Guest]: level so that money lenders are not charging daily interest rates, right?
[Guest]: If we had banking penetration at that level, if we had more microcredit associations and
[Guest]: organizations who gave credit to women, which we've had, right?
[Guest]: We've had this in Ahmedabad, we've had this with SEWA, we've had this in Bangladesh, right?
[Guest]: He even won the Nobel Peace Prize for the microcredit work that he did in Bangladesh,
[Guest]: Eunice.
[Guest]: So there are ways to make this happen to make this particular problem less of a problem.
[Guest]: But I think what is happening with Vijaya is a lifelong problem of having her choices
[Guest]: taken away from her, right?
[Guest]: I'm not sure how much of a hand she had in whether she gets to choose whether she marries
[Guest]: or not, or who she marries or not.
[Guest]: I don't know if she had much control over whether she can get educated or not.
[Guest]: I don't know if her family skilled her in anything except household work, right?
[Guest]: So I really don't know enough about her life to actually think of every single thing that
[Guest]: has gone wrong that could have had some intervention and been fixed for this to not be a problem.
[Amit Varma]: Which also speaks to, you know, no matter, I mean, obviously, you and I both, I'm sure
[Amit Varma]: agree with Pinker.
[Amit Varma]: The fact is that the world is so much better and we're moving in the right direction, but,
[Amit Varma]: oh man, this shows you what a long way we still have to go.
[Guest]: Well, I absolutely agree with Pinker, but also we need to recognize that the distribution
[Guest]: hasn't been even, right?
[Guest]: Some of us are at the top end of the ladder of the gains from this distribution.
[Guest]: I mean, me in particular, I'm a post-colonial, close to post-liberalization child of India,
[Guest]: right?
[Guest]: So I was there when liberalization happened.
[Guest]: I remember going from two types of chocolate in the store to potentially 20 types of chocolate
[Guest]: in the store in a matter of a few years.
[Amit Varma]: So I have really reaped the benefit.
[Amit Varma]: Sugar is poison.
[Amit Varma]: I had to put that in there.
[Amit Varma]: Please don't have chocolate, except 95% dark, sorry, carry on.
[Amit Varma]: As Amit said, there are many things we disagree on.
[Guest]: This is one of them.
[Guest]: So I do like dark chocolate though.
[Guest]: Just you know, a hint for future podcast freebies.
[Amit Varma]: I just bought you lunch.
[Amit Varma]: That's my quota for the year over.
[Amit Varma]: The year is almost over.
[Guest]: It's almost over.
[Guest]: So maybe in January.
[Guest]: So I have particularly, I think, benefited from this, right?
[Guest]: So you know, post-colonial, because you know, I've had many generations of English speakers
[Guest]: in the family, which made it very easy for me to get a PhD in economics in an English
[Guest]: speaking country in the United States.
[Guest]: And you know, these things are terribly part dependent.
[Guest]: I think it would have been hard to learn a new language and then go on to do my PhD in
[Guest]: that particular subject.
[Guest]: So I think I really benefited from that, from liberalization, particularly because, you
[Guest]: know, all of us, all of our incomes got raised and all of our choices became better.
[Guest]: And you know, especially with access to internet and the ability to actually find out about
[Guest]: simple things, universities, the kind of people you want to work with, what we were reading
[Guest]: at the time.
[Guest]: I like to tell the story, my first copy of the road to serfdom was ordered by mail, like
[Unknown]: snail mail, right?
[Guest]: To fill out the copy and put in a banker's check, was $25 banker's check to the publisher.
[Amit Varma]: Which year was this?
[Guest]: This was a while ago, must have been early 2000s or late 90s, something like early 2000s.
[Guest]: And University of Chicago Press was the publisher in question and the bookstore that I'm talking
[Guest]: about helped me do it.
[Guest]: They showed me the form and I filled it out and I sent it.
[Guest]: And now the world has just changed.
[Guest]: I mean, I can get any book that you tell me about in a matter of seconds.
[Guest]: So I think some of us have really benefited.
[Guest]: We were already educated enough or we came from wonderful families.
[Guest]: We have never had financial insecurity in our lives.
[Guest]: I mean, at least I haven't a genuine financial insecurity.
[Guest]: So health insecurity, right?
[Guest]: So we have benefited from how wonderful the world is more than some of the others.
[Guest]: So I think while I agree with the overall thesis that the world is far better, far safer,
[Guest]: everything, I don't think that applies equally to everybody.
[Amit Varma]: I think it's gotten better at different velocities for different kinds of people.
[Amit Varma]: So the velocity for someone in Vijaya's position, for example, is far less, but it is still
[Guest]: moving in the right direction.
[Guest]: Absolutely.
[Guest]: I'll definitely agree with that.
[Guest]: But I'm not sure how much the internet revolution has already helped Vijaya.
[Guest]: It no doubt will in the future.
[Guest]: If not anything, it will increase the size of her market.
[Guest]: So there will be some benefits that come or accrue to everyone, even if they're not directly
[Guest]: participating in that economy.
[Guest]: So if I take my grandfather to the temple, now that I'm wealthier, I'm more likely to
[Guest]: buy more expensive flowers or more flowers and so on and so forth.
[Guest]: So I think just participating in this kind of modern world economy benefits Vijaya and
[Guest]: that's lovely.
[Guest]: And yeah, I think, I think the rate at which we are able to partake in the gains or catapult
[Guest]: ourselves to the next level, or the rate at which opportunities open up, right, those
[Guest]: are all different.
[Amit Varma]: Absolutely.
[Amit Varma]: And, you know, if our economy had been open from the start, or if it even opened up much
[Guest]: more than it did in 91, which would be true for a lot more people, better off.
[Amit Varma]: Absolutely.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah.
[Amit Varma]: So we should really be talking about what happened in 2018, if our listeners still want
[Amit Varma]: to go through that drudge, and what we're looking forward to in 2019.
[Amit Varma]: But before that, is there something on your list you've left out?
[Guest]: Yeah, no, I mean, I was just thinking about what are the things that surprised me about
[Guest]: the 100 episodes.
[Guest]: And one of the things was the couple of episodes you did on cricket.
[Guest]: I'm not really a cricket person, I actually call myself a cricket widow.
[Guest]: Because my husband Nandu watches a lot of cricket and he watches test matches, which
[Guest]: he really enjoys, which go on sort of forever, for weeks and weeks, and so I think one of
[Guest]: the great disappointments in his life is that I'm not that excited about cricket.
[Guest]: But I was genuinely surprised when I heard both those episodes, probably because they
[Guest]: were about so much more than cricket itself or cricket technique.
[Guest]: And also, they were from cricket commentators or writers and not cricketers themselves.
[Amit Varma]: That kind of put me to sleep.
[Amit Varma]: One episode was with Gideon Haye and Prem Panekar, Prem being a very good friend of
[Amit Varma]: Boshruti and mine, hi Prem, if you're listening.
[Guest]: And the other one was with Harsha Bhogle.
[Guest]: Yeah, I thought both were wonderful.
[Guest]: I think Gideon and Prem's was more about the money in cricket and the financial aspect,
[Guest]: which also Harsha touched upon.
[Guest]: But Harsha sort of placed the game in a particular context of the history of India in the last
[Guest]: 50 years and connected it to all the big events of post-colonialism, post-liberalization,
[Guest]: how the game has taken off, and also how being integrated to the modern world of cricket
[Guest]: where money plays a big role changes how dispensable the cricketers are and how they behave on
[Guest]: and off the field and how viewers think about them and what our relationship is with individuals
[Guest]: and the team.
[Guest]: I thought it was really great, both the episodes were really great and very insightful.
[Guest]: I was very surprised personally, because when I saw that episode, I was like, oh-ho, now
[Unknown]: I have to hear this too.
[Guest]: So this was, yeah, so I think those were some of the surprises.
[Guest]: I mean, while I've learned something from every episode, pretty much, and a lot of the
[Guest]: friends, you know, people you've had on the show are friends of ours in common or we've
[Guest]: known or we've come across in some professional or personal capacity, but, you know, these
[Guest]: were some of the highlights.
[Guest]: I'm sorry if I missed anyone out.
[Amit Varma]: I'm sure I'm going to get a few messages and tweets.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah.
[Amit Varma]: Thanks a lot.
[Amit Varma]: Everyone who she's missed out, who's been a guest on the show and hasn't been mentioned
[Amit Varma]: already.
[Amit Varma]: Please know that I love you, but there are listeners here who don't quite feel the same
[Guest]: way.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah.
[Guest]: I think I have to mention Vivek, my nemesis.
[Amit Varma]: No, I'm kidding.
[Unknown]: No, I'm kidding.
[Unknown]: I love Vivek.
[Guest]: I've really enjoyed episodes with him, to be honest.
[Amit Varma]: Vivek Kaul, which I'm sure all your listeners are familiar with, who I'm sure all your listeners
[Amit Varma]: are familiar with.
[Amit Varma]: Who I hope is listening to this.
[Guest]: Yeah.
[Guest]: He's wonderful.
[Guest]: He has this incredible ability to just simplify what seems like a really big problem.
[Guest]: You know, especially because I think most people just go to sleep when they hear about
[Guest]: a financial problem or a financial scandal, and he has this incredible ability to simplify
[Guest]: and make it accessible.
[Amit Varma]: And simplify not in a negative sense of make it simplistic, but in a good sense of make
[Amit Varma]: it easy to understand.
[Amit Varma]: So now you get it.
[Amit Varma]: And then, yeah.
[Amit Varma]: And then once you get it, you get it.
[Guest]: Yeah.
[Guest]: The moment Vivek says it, it seems obvious, which I think is a great skill.
[Guest]: It's a fantastic skill.
[Guest]: So I've really enjoyed Vivek's episode.
[Guest]: I have even been a guest with him once, while we discovered, yes, actually, I must say,
[Guest]: I sort of elbowed myself into that episode.
[Guest]: I heard that they were doing one that day about our famous prime minister's famous words
[Guest]: on pakodanomics, and I sort of elbowed my way in because I thought Vivek was getting
[Guest]: ahead in the competition of not favorite, but frequent guest, apparently, right?
[Guest]: So yeah, Vivek's episodes I have really enjoyed.
[Guest]: I think, you know, the last one I think was ILNFS.
[Guest]: And that was, again, an area I didn't know that much about.
[Guest]: And just, you know, Vivek's ability to take a lot of information, which may or may not
[Guest]: be out there, as he as he pointed out, there's so this opacity in how these NBFCs function.
[Guest]: So his ability to take all that information and simplify and just sort of get to the root
[Amit Varma]: of the problem is quite amazing.
[Amit Varma]: In fact, I'll tell my, I'll get my listeners into a secret and I don't know if you know
[Amit Varma]: this.
[Amit Varma]: I wonder if I've told you.
[Amit Varma]: He said Vivek and I once got together and we said we'll do a joint podcast in Hindi.
[Unknown]: And we called it...
[Amit Varma]: And your Hindi wasn't good enough?
[Amit Varma]: My Hindi is amazing.
[Amit Varma]: And we called it Fande Wali Baat.
[Amit Varma]: So every episode was like five minutes long.
[Amit Varma]: And Vivek and I would talk about a funda from cognitive psychology, but related to normal
[Amit Varma]: life.
[Amit Varma]: For example, you talk about the Sankhya's fallacy.
[Amit Varma]: But you speak about how that is why people stay in bad marriages or why if you walk into
[Amit Varma]: a bad movie, you're like, oh, I've already paid so much, I might as well finish and blah,
[Amit Varma]: blah, blah.
[Amit Varma]: And we recorded like nine episodes of that as a pilot.
[Guest]: You did?
[Guest]: I didn't know you recorded it.
[Guest]: I knew it was an idea.
[Amit Varma]: No, we recorded nine episodes as a pilot and we thought it sounded great.
[Amit Varma]: But it really went nowhere.
[Amit Varma]: And so if there are any...
[Guest]: Why have I been denied of hearing these nine episodes?
[Amit Varma]: If there are sponsors out there who are willing to put money behind this, kindly get in touch
[Amit Varma]: the brilliant Vivek Kaul and the barely possible Amit Verma.
[Guest]: Well, I'm hoping Vivek did the Hindi speaking.
[Amit Varma]: We both did.
[Amit Varma]: My Hindi is very good.
[Amit Varma]: You are defaming me.
[Amit Varma]: Verma only name.
[Guest]: Let's talk for two minutes in Hindi.
[Guest]: Come on.
[Amit Varma]: Come on.
[Amit Varma]: What do you want to talk about?
[Guest]: I want to talk about 2018.
[Amit Varma]: But what do you call 2018 in Hindi?
[Amit Varma]: 2018.
[Amit Varma]: Absolutely.
[Amit Varma]: In 2018, for you...
[Amit Varma]: For me...
[Amit Varma]: I think we'll switch to English.
[Amit Varma]: Let's switch back to English.
[Guest]: But why do you keep saying 2018 was a bad year?
[Unknown]: I mean, it might have been, but I want to know why you think it was so terrible.
[Guest]: Actually, 2018 was a very good year for me.
[Amit Varma]: I lost 15 kgs.
[Amit Varma]: I didn't mean personally.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah.
[Guest]: I mean, I don't know.
[Amit Varma]: It was more of the same year.
[Amit Varma]: It was more of Trump, more of Modi, more of Pappu being Pappu, which is what I will continue
[Amit Varma]: calling him.
[Amit Varma]: And we can discuss that also.
[Amit Varma]: But it was just in the sense that I don't think in all of the ways that we bemoan what
[Amit Varma]: has happened in the last three or four years, the world didn't really get much better.
[Amit Varma]: We should perhaps be thankful that Modi didn't unleash another demonetization kind of monstrous
[Amit Varma]: blunder on us.
[Amit Varma]: But, well, there's always 2019 for that.
[Guest]: I'll tell you why I think 2018 was an interesting year.
[Guest]: I mean, you and I have always had this view that, you know, it's not about the individuals.
[Guest]: It's about the political rules of the game and the incentives.
[Guest]: So you and I are not partisan at all.
[Guest]: I mean, we've rarely...
[Guest]: We've discussed a lot of politics, but we never discuss it from a partisan point of
[Guest]: view, which is what most people talk about when they talk about politics, you know, in
[Guest]: most contexts.
[Guest]: And I think in 2018, the penny might have dropped for many people that Modi is also
[Guest]: going to be more of the same.
[Guest]: And this is not because there's something peculiar about him or something similar about
[Guest]: him to other dictators slash prime ministers that we've had.
[Guest]: It's just simply the incentives are terrible.
[Guest]: The incentives lead one to rely more on centralization and more on control and more on statism.
[Guest]: And that's what we got.
[Guest]: And I think the penny might have dropped for many people this year that this was never
[Guest]: about Modi being able to change our lives dramatically.
[Amit Varma]: I think that penny should have dropped in 2014.
[Amit Varma]: And also the thing is, it irritates me when people keep talking about him as right wing
[Amit Varma]: neoliberal because whatever his social tendencies might be on economics, he's statist, he's
[Guest]: hardcore left wing.
[Guest]: And his social tendencies are also not very liberal.
[Amit Varma]: Exactly.
[Amit Varma]: So he's the worst of both possible worlds.
[Amit Varma]: I'll tell you my biggest disappointment this year is one, there was a laudable effort to
[Amit Varma]: recast Rahul Gandhi as someone who's got progressive ideas, who knows what he's talking about,
[Amit Varma]: and all of that, and who's not as stupid as he seems to be, and which is fine.
[Amit Varma]: But the problem there is that a lot of the ways in which they've recast themselves is
[Amit Varma]: for me a step back, in the sense that there is a soft Hindutva, where instead of, you
[Amit Varma]: know, just speaking of individual rights, and so on, as they should finally do, despite
[Amit Varma]: not having done it for seven decades, he goes to Kedarnath and when, you know, there was
[Amit Varma]: this fuss where the BJP accused him of eating chicken.
[Amit Varma]: And instead of just mocking them, as he should have, he said, No, I had shudh veg and defended
[Amit Varma]: himself.
[Amit Varma]: And so this coating of the soft Hindutva vote, then getting into all of these populist areas,
[Amit Varma]: like now farm loan waivers have become the rega.
[Amit Varma]: And I understand that farm loan waivers might even be a necessary anesthetic.
[Amit Varma]: But there are deeper structural issues that you have to take on.
[Amit Varma]: And those structural issues were actually caused by the Congress, but forget the past.
[Amit Varma]: But Modi's done absolutely nothing about them.
[Amit Varma]: Despite blaming Nehru for everything, he hasn't actually reversed anything Nehru did.
[Amit Varma]: So what are you blaming him for?
[Guest]: Yeah.
[Guest]: And no, you're absolutely right.
[Guest]: I mean, Modi has been a continuation, you know, as Arun Shourie famously put, he's Congress
[Amit Varma]: plus cow.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah.
[Amit Varma]: Right.
[Amit Varma]: Actually, Congress is now Congress plus cow.
[Guest]: You know something, I am not so sure about that.
[Guest]: I'm not sure how much of the soft Hindutva peddling was just campaign, sort of, you know,
[Guest]: people are following you, the media is following you, you're pandering in a particular way.
[Guest]: I don't know how much of that is going to translate to policy.
[Guest]: To be honest, I don't see Congress constituencies doing much of that.
[Amit Varma]: I could be wrong as I have been in the past.
[Amit Varma]: But when you talk about policy, for example, people said that, you know, people keep trying
[Amit Varma]: to, I guess, because of the understandable reason that they're anti Modi and something
[Amit Varma]: has to be done, which I agree with, they keep trying to recast Rahul Gandhi as someone who's
[Amit Varma]: actually not very stupid, which I think is silly, because, you know, the evidence is
[Amit Varma]: out there on YouTube.
[Amit Varma]: And even when he's been asked questions this year in press conferences, he's been lauded
[Amit Varma]: for about Indira Gandhi's policies, he's defended bank nationalizations, he's defended the nonsense
[Amit Varma]: he did.
[Amit Varma]: He even said in a press conference recently, just three or four months ago, that the Congress
[Amit Varma]: was not involved in 1984.
[Amit Varma]: Now, I think what a lot of Congress supporters don't realize is that when I call him stupid,
[Amit Varma]: I'm giving him the benefit of the doubt.
[Amit Varma]: It's Hanlon's razor, never attribute to malice what can be adequately explained by stupidity.
[Amit Varma]: Because if he's not stupid, he's an asshole.
[Guest]: These are the two options.
[Guest]: Well, I'll tell you the peculiar thing about Rahul Gandhi.
[Guest]: You know, we all have family members who have really bizarre views, right?
[Guest]: They've just been fortunate enough that they haven't been Prime Minister.
[Guest]: So we all have had the crazy Hindutva uncle or the crazy controlling aunt or, you know,
[Guest]: the crazy cousin who might have done something terrible.
[Guest]: Now, the problem is, all of these are Rahul Gandhi's immediate relatives, right?
[Guest]: And I can understand the personal problem of trying to distance yourself from a grandfather
[Guest]: who's beloved by hundreds of millions and your grandmother and your uncle, who's quite
[Guest]: frankly a monster, you know, at least based on the policies, I can understand.
[Amit Varma]: Sorry for interrupting.
[Amit Varma]: They brought out a tweet recently on Sanjay Gandhi's birth anniversary.
[Guest]: I was horrified by that.
[Guest]: Hailing him as a visionary leader who cared for the poor.
[Guest]: Yeah.
[Guest]: So this is my thing.
[Amit Varma]: Is this the alternative to Modi you're putting forward?
[Guest]: Yeah.
[Guest]: So my thing is, you know, I think what Congress has relied on in the past is the huge shadow
[Guest]: that is cast by Nehru and then Indira Gandhi, Rajiv Gandhi and Sonia Gandhi, right?
[Guest]: And I think the fundamental misunderstanding with Rahul Gandhi is, I don't think he's stupid
[Guest]: or malicious.
[Guest]: I think it's a lack of recognition that Congress can do without the past mistakes, that people
[Guest]: will actually vote for Congress, even if you distance yourself from the follies of your
[Guest]: family members for which you didn't contribute at all.
[Amit Varma]: I mean, he wasn't even around for most of this time.
[Amit Varma]: I would say it would be...
[Amit Varma]: I would respect him more.
[Amit Varma]: It would be horrible to blame someone for the mistakes of his ancestors.
[Amit Varma]: My issue with Rahul Gandhi is not whose son or grandson he is.
[Guest]: My issue with him is that he keeps defending those mistakes.
[Guest]: Exactly.
[Guest]: I'm saying he needs to distance himself politically from them.
[Guest]: Personally, your equation you have with your crazy uncle who forced sterilization upon
[Guest]: millions is a whole different question, right?
[Guest]: You might have been your favorite uncle despite all of it.
[Guest]: But I think politically, I don't think he's recognized that he needs to distance himself
[Guest]: and actually come out with a clean platform of what it is that he stands for.
[Amit Varma]: And also, you know, I think a lot of Congress supporters behave as if history began in 2014.
[Guest]: Exactly.
[Amit Varma]: And the thing is, it's very easy to appear virtuous when you are in opposition.
[Amit Varma]: The reason Modi is where he is, is because this party ruined this country and kept us
[Amit Varma]: poor for 70 years.
[Guest]: That much is a fact.
[Guest]: And that's why the rhetoric Modi gives when he blames Nehru and Indira Gandhi is so powerful.
[Amit Varma]: Yes, but that rhetoric is kind of idiotic now, because for five years, Modi has himself
[Amit Varma]: done nothing to reverse any of that.
[Guest]: In fact, he's done more of the same.
[Amit Varma]: So I am losing my patience with the, oh, but 70 years they have done this and everything
[Amit Varma]: is Nehru's fault, which is rhetoric, which, you know, would have resonated in 2014.
[Amit Varma]: But it doesn't.
[Amit Varma]: And you see a lot of these young people who've come to political consciousness after 2014,
[Amit Varma]: behaving as if the Congress is this great virtuous party.
[Guest]: Yeah, we need to read more history.
[Guest]: We need to.
[Guest]: Wait, you know, your episode with Gyan Prakash should solve that problem.
[Amit Varma]: My episode with Gyan Prakash should solve some of that problem, certainly.
[Amit Varma]: And none of this is to defend Modi in any way.
[Amit Varma]: You know, Modi's just been a horrible Prime Minister.
[Amit Varma]: Definitely worse since Indira Gandhi.
[Guest]: Whether he is...
[Amit Varma]: Maybe worse.
[Guest]: Maybe worse because...
[Amit Varma]: She only demonetized 10,000 rupee notes.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah.
[Guest]: But if you leave aside demon, she did call the emergency ban nationalization.
[Amit Varma]: I mean, economic policies alone, even if you leave emergency aside...
[Guest]: Were really terrible.
[Guest]: In fact, a lot of the farm loan waiver problem, I think you had an episode with this with
[Guest]: Kumar Anand and this with Kumar Anand also on public sector banks, right?
[Guest]: With Kumar and Vivek, I think those two did a...
[Guest]: Yeah.
[Guest]: And those were great, but the farm loan waiver problem is, as you said, it's just treating
[Guest]: the symptom.
[Guest]: It is not treating the actual problem.
[Guest]: So you've done a bunch of episodes on the farming problem, right?
[Guest]: With Pawan, with Karthik Shashidharan, with Kumar, right?
[Guest]: And basic... and Gunwant Patil, of course, our favorite one.
[Guest]: Basically, each one of those episodes talked about how farmers are shackled, right?
[Guest]: Whether it is they don't have access to futures market, which is what Karthik talked about,
[Guest]: or they don't have access to any markets, which is what Kumar talked about, right?
[Guest]: We've denied them markets and inputs.
[Guest]: We've denied them market and outputs.
[Guest]: And they don't have access to the latest innovation or to global technology, as Gunwant Patil
[Guest]: pointed out.
[Guest]: We've basically made sure that our farmers remain poor and they have no choice but to
[Guest]: remain poor.
[Guest]: And when our farmers are poor and unproductive, as I pointed out in the right to property
[Guest]: episode, we haven't even given them the exit option of exiting farming, because their most
[Amit Varma]: valuable asset is depressed, because they can only sell it to farmers.
[Amit Varma]: Another thing I discussed with Vivek and why things are coming to a head now is that all
[Amit Varma]: the agitations you see recently from the Jats in Haryana, the Patidas, the Kapus in Andhra
[Guest]: Pradesh, the Kapus, I believe, and the Marathas here, they're all landowning cars.
[Amit Varma]: And one of the reasons they're agitating is because with every generation, a farmer's
[Amit Varma]: land gets divided among his descendants, and they have a smaller and smaller parcel.
[Amit Varma]: And it's completely unsustainable now, they don't have an exit.
[Amit Varma]: And this is also one reason why, you know, while I would certainly like, I want Modi
[Amit Varma]: to lose 2019.
[Amit Varma]: But the bottom line is that, you know, a change at the top of politics is not going to make
[Amit Varma]: a difference to the country because we are screwed, our jobs crisis on which I had a
[Amit Varma]: couple of episodes is, you know, is reaching horrendously bad proportions.
[Amit Varma]: The agricultural crisis is crazy.
[Guest]: Plus, there is this cow genie that has been let out of the bottle.
[Guest]: And they're related, yeah.
[Guest]: And they're related.
[Guest]: So I think the farmer's distress, I mean, farm loan waiver, just moves the guillotine
[Guest]: away, right?
[Guest]: Sort of.
[Guest]: Like right now, they have this extreme problem of having to pay back loans when they don't
[Guest]: have the money.
[Guest]: And that solves that problem immediately.
[Guest]: But it doesn't solve anything long term.
[Guest]: And frankly, as Gunman Patilji pointed out, they don't want the waivers, they want empowerment,
[Guest]: they want access to markets, they want to control their own choices.
[Guest]: Right now, they can't choose anything.
[Guest]: They essentially have to keep doing what their great grandparents did, because that's how
[Guest]: the regulatory system is set up.
[Guest]: And the modern world is simply not productive on such a small plot of land, doing what the
[Guest]: great grandparents did with a few subsidies and waivers here and there thrown in.
[Guest]: It's not really going to make them rich.
[Amit Varma]: It's horrendous.
[Amit Varma]: It's so depressing.
[Amit Varma]: But we do have some positive.
[Amit Varma]: I mean, last year wasn't all bad.
[Guest]: There was some very good news, especially when it comes to gender, for example.
[Guest]: Yeah, I think I mean, before minority rights in general, including gender, but I think
[Guest]: the I'll start with decriminalization of 377.
[Guest]: I mean, that is incredibly positive.
[Guest]: This is something I mean, you have written a lot about the victimless crimes, right?
[Guest]: What are consensual relationships among adults which are being regulated for no reason and
[Guest]: horribly so criminalized in India?
[Guest]: And you know, I mean, you've had episodes where, you know, we've had first person accounts
[Guest]: of how the police harass you, right?
[Guest]: How people try to extort you by trying to out your sexuality or try to get money out
[Amit Varma]: of you.
[Amit Varma]: There was a column called the Matunga racket many, many years ago about this.
[Amit Varma]: So just go to IndiaUncut.com and search for the Matunga racket and you'll come across
[Guest]: it.
[Guest]: And so in general, I think the idea that so many more people are liberated and can discuss
[Guest]: their own sexuality.
[Guest]: I mean, if they wish to be private about it, that's, of course, their choice.
[Guest]: But now they don't have to worry about state coercion.
[Guest]: They don't have to worry about, you know, jail time and things like that.
[Guest]: And they don't have to worry about things like the Matunga racket where people are extorting
[Guest]: money from them because something is, you know, makes them a criminal in the eyes of
[Guest]: the law.
[Guest]: So I think that is a huge step forward.
[Amit Varma]: Like I read an episode about being gay in India with Navin Arora, who's a stand up comedian
[Amit Varma]: and who's also runs a show for IVM podcast called Keeping It Queer.
[Guest]: He was amazing.
[Guest]: I really loved him.
[Guest]: And his first person account, it was just so poignant the way he talked about coming
[Guest]: out to his family, his experiences, it just like really brought tears to my eyes.
[Amit Varma]: You know what was the most heartening thing is that when 377 was abolished, it was almost
[Amit Varma]: as if its time had come.
[Amit Varma]: And all I heard, and obviously there's a selection bias from the kind of people I follow and
[Amit Varma]: all that.
[Amit Varma]: But all I heard was people very glad that it's been abolished.
[Amit Varma]: 25 years back, I don't think that's all I would have heard.
[Amit Varma]: 25 years back, you know, there would have been a lot more noise against it.
[Amit Varma]: And now it was like, okay, everyone's accepted it was an anachronism and it's got to go.
[Amit Varma]: And that's also a sign of how a society's norms evolve over time.
[Guest]: Something Matt Ridley spoke about.
[Guest]: Matt Ridley spoke about it.
[Guest]: I was about to mention.
[Unknown]: And law must follow society.
[Unknown]: Yeah.
[Guest]: Otherwise, if you're imposing something, I mean, in an ideal world, I would have liked
[Guest]: the constitution to include the third gender and sexual orientation, but it's really difficult
[Guest]: because social norms were different then and they may not even thought about it.
[Guest]: It certainly didn't come up, you know, LGBTQ rights didn't come up in Constituent Assembly
[Guest]: debates.
[Guest]: And this is the natural way in which we have evolved.
[Guest]: Our minds have opened up.
[Guest]: We are much more cognizant of both the third gender and also gender fluidity and also,
[Guest]: you know, different sexual orientation.
[Guest]: And all of these three things, we see more of it in society around us because, you know,
[Amit Varma]: so much migration.
[Amit Varma]: And I've actually argued that the constitution need not even have mentioned LGBTQ per se.
[Amit Varma]: If you just protect individual rights strongly enough, then all minorities, if those rights
[Amit Varma]: are strong enough, all minorities get protected, all genders get protected, but sadly our constitution
[Guest]: doesn't do that.
[Guest]: No.
[Guest]: And also, you know, the Indian Penal Code did have this crazy Victorian morality, which
[Amit Varma]: could have been struck down if it was unconstitutional, but it wasn't unconstitutional.
[Guest]: Well, it was struck down first and then it was reversed.
[Guest]: And you know, there's also a crazy history to how it happened.
[Guest]: I am so glad that the Supreme Court did the right thing.
[Guest]: It's also, you know, I mean, these are small things, just the peace of mind for people
[Guest]: who have a different orientation, their ability to hold someone's hand.
[Guest]: I mean, there's no way we can value these things as economists, right?
[Guest]: These are just really big milestones for regular folks in India.
[Guest]: And I'm so thrilled it's happened.
[Guest]: And all the people we know who belong to the LGBTQ community, we are relatively elite.
[Guest]: You know, we have not known too many people who've been extorted or who've been harassed
[Guest]: by the police or molested even, you know, out of fear of being outed and so on.
[Guest]: But this obviously, you know, the more powerless you are in India, that usually translates
[Guest]: into the less money you have, the more you face these things.
[Guest]: So I think this judgment brings about equality, not just between the different genders and
[Guest]: different sexual orientation, but it also reduces the gap between people who are elite
[Guest]: and powerful and could have led these lives anyway, even with 377, which was a terrible
[Guest]: law versus, you know, poorer folks or people who don't have that kind of safety and security
[Guest]: in the environment that they inhabit.
[Guest]: So I think it's just a really wonderful thing.
[Amit Varma]: Couldn't agree with you more.
[Amit Varma]: And plus there were other judgments, it was a triple talaq judgment, for example, which
[Amit Varma]: some have described as the right decision for the wrong reasons, but whatever, it's
[Guest]: the right decision.
[Guest]: Yes and no.
[Guest]: You know, in the sense that if I just took my pure principle, you know, textbook kind
[Guest]: of opinion, I would say there are different kinds of contracts and they can have clauses
[Guest]: for different kinds of dissolution of contract, right?
[Guest]: So if I contract with you that if I say, you know, sugar, sugar, sugar three times and
[Guest]: you kick me out of the studio, it ought to be okay.
[Guest]: I'm surprised you didn't already actually, but it ought to be okay.
[Amit Varma]: Just don't say sugar again, you're triggering me.
[Guest]: Sugar again?
[Guest]: Oh God.
[Guest]: So, but that is not the, that doesn't take into account the social context, right?
[Guest]: Because that assumes that these women that we're talking about got into the contract
[Guest]: of their own volition and gave their genuine consent, which we know that the way marriage
[Guest]: works in India is not always the case, right?
[Guest]: So yes, technically it's a contract and technically one should be able to decide the terms on
[Guest]: which you dissolve the contract and triple talaq is as good as any, right?
[Guest]: But that is not the case in India.
[Guest]: Most of these women did not choose who they were married to.
[Guest]: The circumstances are such that they don't have much control or much choice and they
[Guest]: are denied consent all the time in small and big things.
[Guest]: And I think removing triple talaq just goes a long way towards mitigating one kind of
[Guest]: problem for Muslim women who are trapped in a particular social context.
[Amit Varma]: Exactly.
[Guest]: I agree with you.
[Guest]: So I think, yeah, I mean, it may have been for the wrong reasons and it may not be something
[Guest]: I generally think is a problem, but it is a problem in India and it is definitely a
[Guest]: move in the right direction.
[Guest]: And I think, I mean, speaking of the triple talaq, this has been a great year for sort
[Guest]: of like gender awakening and gender rights, right?
[Guest]: Not just minority rights.
[Guest]: I think it's been amazing.
[Guest]: You have done a great job, I must say.
[Guest]: I have congratulated you privately in the past, but you have had so many women come
[Guest]: and actually talk about whether it's, you know, gender, female workforce participation
[Guest]: or whether it's the Me Too movement.
[Guest]: I think you've really pushed the envelope and you were one of the early ones to wake
[Amit Varma]: up to what was happening.
[Amit Varma]: So that is awesome.
[Amit Varma]: Not really.
[Guest]: I was just lucky I knew these people and they agreed to come on the show.
[Guest]: You're not lucky you know these people.
[Amit Varma]: You've cultivated these relationships with very smart women.
[Amit Varma]: Listen, but you don't congratulate someone for doing something which should just be completely
[Amit Varma]: par for the course.
[Amit Varma]: I mean, this is a burning issue at the time and if you're doing a podcast, you have to
[Guest]: call these people.
[Guest]: Well, I'll tell you what I'm congratulating you for in particular.
[Guest]: Most of the times when I spoke, you know, men would ask women, sometimes they would
[Guest]: ask me, what should they do?
[Guest]: I would say, just listen, right?
[Guest]: Let's start by listening because I think even though we're in the same room, half the times
[Guest]: we inhabit slightly different worlds, whether we're in the same bus compartment, same restaurant,
[Guest]: we just use physical space and we navigate it differently.
[Guest]: And most men are simply not aware of it.
[Guest]: Not because they are stupid or oblivious, but because they are not walking in our shoes,
[Guest]: however uncomfortable they might be.
[Guest]: So I think that was one wonderful thing.
[Guest]: You brought on these wonderful guests and you gave them a chance and a platform to express
[Guest]: the kind of problems.
[Guest]: I love the show that you did with Nikita and Supriya.
[Guest]: I'm a big fan of their work.
[Guest]: Both of theirs.
[Guest]: I've read a lot of their writing.
[Guest]: I think Nikita's story.
[Amit Varma]: Nikita did a couple of really good feature stories for the next caravan issue after that
[Guest]: if you read them.
[Guest]: Yeah, the Pachauri one, right?
[Guest]: It was fantastic.
[Guest]: The Pachauri one, not the Pachauri one.
[Guest]: Oh, after that.
[Amit Varma]: Right after I recorded with them, after the episode was out, the next month, I think Caravan
[Guest]: did a Me Too issue where they had four stories and she wrote two of them.
[Unknown]: Yes, I read that one.
[Guest]: And yeah, so her insight, you know, her insight is twofold, right?
[Guest]: One is her experience as a young female journalist.
[Guest]: It's a world that is difficult to navigate.
[Guest]: And the other is her experience covering, you know, both people who have been harassed
[Guest]: and the harassers, right?
[Guest]: She had a very unique perspective.
[Guest]: It was, I think, a fantastic episode.
[Guest]: I think the episode that you did with the very, very incredibly bright young women of
[Amit Varma]: Takshashila Institution and Pragati.
[Amit Varma]: The Matrix of Empowerment.
[Amit Varma]: I think that's episode 90.
[Amit Varma]: I really liked that episode and I like both the Me Too episodes, even the one I did with
[Amit Varma]: you.
[Guest]: I thought you were great.
[Guest]: Even the one you did with me.
[Amit Varma]: Even, even.
[Amit Varma]: Oh God, I'm getting into trouble now.
[Guest]: No, I had a lot of fun doing that.
[Guest]: It's another one of those things where the time for something like that had come and
[Guest]: it had just been bubbling for a long time.
[Guest]: And I think you and I in particular just discussed the incentives part of it, but I also liked
[Guest]: listening to the social context that so many of your other guests talked about, especially
[Guest]: the metrics of female empowerment.
[Guest]: I think that was a really great episode because these things are hard to measure.
[Guest]: You can't just measure it as, you know, how much money the women are making or how much
[Guest]: distribution they have in, you know, household income or household wealth and so on.
[Guest]: It's so many small, you know, one lovely thing that you mentioned in your episode with Vikram
[Guest]: Doctor.
[Amit Varma]: I really loved that episode.
[Amit Varma]: That's a great episode.
[Amit Varma]: He was amazing.
[Guest]: And you, you guys were talking about, you know, the banana flower, which in Tamil we
[Guest]: call vaarappu.
[Guest]: Right?
[Amit Varma]: I'm not even going to try to say that.
[Guest]: I do a fair bit of South Indian cooking.
[Guest]: I'm very fond of that food.
[Guest]: This is one thing I'm not touching, simply because as you mentioned, it is so labor intensive
[Guest]: and I could not be bothered.
[Guest]: Right.
[Guest]: And he talked about using steel utensils instead of brass ones and so on.
[Guest]: And these are all metrics of how women have more space and more of a voice in the power
[Guest]: structure of families.
[Amit Varma]: And they can say no.
[Amit Varma]: No, it's very interesting.
[Amit Varma]: I mean, Vikram's point there was that the rise of stainless steel utensils in India,
[Amit Varma]: which over a period of 10 years, that whole revolution happened where everything was stainless
[Amit Varma]: steel was a sign of the empowerment of women.
[Guest]: I agree with him.
[Amit Varma]: And now I think non-stick.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, and it's interesting, this email group that we're both part of, which I started,
[Amit Varma]: Lucretius, there was a discussion about what do you get in the US, which you don't get
[Amit Varma]: here, which I refer to in my next episode as well, oddly enough.
[Amit Varma]: And in the UK, you get all the cleaning liquids in the household fluids that you get are far
[Amit Varma]: better than the ones you get in India.
[Amit Varma]: Because the women are using it themselves as opposed to having the maids use them.
[Amit Varma]: Exactly.
[Amit Varma]: And over here, the household help uses them.
[Guest]: So you don't give much attention to them.
[Guest]: I completely agree.
[Amit Varma]: And I've heard that a similar explanation given for why Indian kitchens are so lousy,
[Amit Varma]: like so small compared to in proportion to the rest of the house.
[Amit Varma]: They don't even have a fan.
[Guest]: Yeah, don't even have a fan.
[Amit Varma]: You know, typically, let alone air conditioning.
[Amit Varma]: My kitchen has a fan.
[Amit Varma]: But because the men don't cook and the men make all the decisions.
[Amit Varma]: So it's either the domestic workers or is the wives who are a sort of domestic workers
[Amit Varma]: in so many Indian households, you know, who don't have agency and who are not.
[Guest]: I must say I've revolutionized my parents' household.
[Guest]: We broke it open and made it an open kitchen so that she can get my mom, who does a lot
[Guest]: of cooking.
[Guest]: She really enjoys cooking.
[Guest]: She's a wonderful cook, has access to air conditioning while she's in the kitchen and
[Guest]: she's not slaving away far away from us.
[Guest]: So that I completely agree with you.
[Guest]: I think, you know, this is funny you mentioned, what do you get in the US which you don't
[Guest]: get in India?
[Guest]: I was recently having this conversation in Bangalore with a few of our common friends,
[Guest]: everything in the sense that I get better banana chips in the US than I get in Delhi.
[Guest]: Better banana chips?
[Guest]: Yeah.
[Guest]: And this is a major problem.
[Guest]: I love bananas.
[Guest]: I love banana chips.
[Guest]: You can't get a decent banana chip in Delhi.
[Guest]: And the reason is India has not become one single market yet.
[Unknown]: Right.
[Guest]: I find it hard to believe that Delhi people have such a terrible taste palette or we can't
[Guest]: find some people with a good enough taste palette out of the 18 million in the greater
[Guest]: NCR region that they would actually like banana chips.
[Amit Varma]: Given all the pollution, can your tongues taste anything yet?
[Guest]: Yes, actually they can.
[Guest]: I will attest to it.
[Guest]: I was there last week.
[Guest]: So, but the problem is that it is so costly to ship banana chips from Kerala or Tamil
[Guest]: Nadu to Delhi that at that price point, there is very little demand, right?
[Guest]: We haven't become one market.
[Guest]: It's baffling to me.
[Guest]: I get Bhakarwadi in New York.
[Guest]: In fact, you know, not in Delhi.
[Amit Varma]: In Meehir Sharma's book Restart, I think he has an anecdote.
[Amit Varma]: I forget the two cities involved.
[Amit Varma]: I think it's Bangalore and Chennai, but two cities like that in neighboring states.
[Amit Varma]: And to send goods from one city to the other, it's cheaper to do it via France than directly.
[Amit Varma]: But that was part of the friction GST was supposed to solve.
[Guest]: Yeah.
[Guest]: And I think it solved a little bit of it, but not exactly.
[Guest]: One, because, you know, some of the checkpoints have opened up, but all of them haven't opened
[Guest]: up.
[Guest]: And the second, you know, I mean, you've had some wonderful GST episodes with Didi, with
[Guest]: Vivek, Kaul and even me, but we've all touched on the same thing, right?
[Guest]: I'm so sorry.
[Guest]: Don't keep bringing it up now, now for the next five years, you're going to keep saying
[Amit Varma]: even.
[Unknown]: Are you sure you want me on your show?
[Unknown]: Even me?
[Unknown]: Are we in business for the next five years?
[Guest]: I don't know if I'm in business, but if I am, you're coming on my show.
[Guest]: No, no, I'm going to come back for the 500th episode.
[Amit Varma]: That's my hope.
[Amit Varma]: Oh my God, I have to live till then.
[Guest]: I think with your sugar-free diet, you might just make it.
[Amit Varma]: That's true.
[Amit Varma]: But you know, who knows what chocolate cravings can do in the middle of the night.
[Guest]: But going back to the episodes that you did on GST, I think we all talked about the same
[Guest]: thing, which is the crazy number of classifications are adding a lot of friction, right?
[Guest]: And on a daily basis, people are trying to figure out, you know, Vivek talked about his
[Guest]: Kit Kat, a biscuit or a chocolate, right?
[Guest]: I talked about a few other examples like that.
[Guest]: So it's the same problem over and over again.
[Guest]: And I don't think we've become a single market, far from it.
[Guest]: I mean, if we were a single market, I should be able to get banana chips in Delhi, which
[Guest]: I don't, right?
[Guest]: And I can get the same banana chips in New York, because at that price point, there are
[Guest]: enough New Yorkers or enough Indians in New York who are willing to pay for it, right?
[Guest]: Same for the very typical chivda that you get in Pune or the bhakarwadi that you get.
[Guest]: I can get all of this in New York.
[Amit Varma]: It's not easy to get.
[Amit Varma]: In fact, one of the insights that came on this thread that we started on this group
[Amit Varma]: was that a lot of the stuff that you get in the US and not here is very specialized neat
[Amit Varma]: stuff.
[Amit Varma]: So if you're a DJ, there'll be a particular kind of console which you have to get there
[Amit Varma]: and you don't get here.
[Amit Varma]: But all the mainstream stuff which you get there, you get here also, except perhaps banana
[Guest]: chips.
[Guest]: No, what I mean is, it's not like you don't get banana chips in Delhi, it's that you don't
[Guest]: get the same kind of banana chips that you get in Kerala, which I don't have a good reason.
[Guest]: I mean, other than that, we are not one single market, or that the market has too many frictions,
[Guest]: right?
[Guest]: And I think that is another, I mean, since we're talking about 2018, I think that's a
[Guest]: huge missed opportunity of 2018, which is GST made such a mess of things and didn't
[Guest]: quite do what it was supposed to do, which was one country, one tax, one market, right?
[Guest]: And it's still one country, thankfully, right?
[Guest]: I don't think it's one tax or one market, right?
[Guest]: It's about five different rates and lots of classifications and nowhere close to a single
[Guest]: market.
[Guest]: And to sort of, you know, unentangle a lot of other regulatory barriers to get closer
[Guest]: to that.
[Guest]: So I know that, you know, my banana chips is sort of a first world problem and, you
[Amit Varma]: know, to hell with me and my banana chips.
[Guest]: Check your banana chip privilege.
[Guest]: But there are a lot of things like this.
[Guest]: And I mean, think of it from the point of view of someone who's making banana chips
[Guest]: in Calicut, he's denied access to my market.
[Guest]: And I would have maybe bought a lot of banana chips, and maybe there are lots of people
[Guest]: like me.
[Guest]: But I've really denied him his prosperity, right?
[Guest]: Because the size of the market, as Adam Smith said, determines the degree of specialization,
[Guest]: right?
[Amit Varma]: It's too bad we've already done the caricature for this episode.
[Amit Varma]: Otherwise we would have had a packet of banana chips, which anyway, moving on from banana
[Amit Varma]: chips, you know, at this point, since it's my hundredth episode, I should and thanks
[Amit Varma]: for thanking myself for reminding me that there are many people who work hard behind
[Amit Varma]: the scenes to make the scene in the unseen a success.
[Amit Varma]: So I'll quickly give a shout out to them before we continue, which is Amit Doshi of
[Amit Varma]: IVM first came to me and his creative director, Thomas also sat together with me and we worked
[Amit Varma]: pretty hard.
[Amit Varma]: And initially we did like five or six pilots, which was a disaster because we were not looking
[Amit Varma]: at it as a straight up interview show.
[Amit Varma]: It was like a produced thing where I'll talk about something and there'll be soundbites
[Amit Varma]: from various people.
[Amit Varma]: And I remember you also gave soundbites and it was a disaster.
[Amit Varma]: And then one day I decided to hell with it, I'm just going to sit and talk with someone
[Amit Varma]: and that's the episode we'll put that.
[Amit Varma]: And that kind of worked much better.
[Amit Varma]: I have had three producers in the time that I've been here, first day was Joshua Thomas,
[Amit Varma]: who's now moved on and is heading the Indian Express podcast team, wonderful guy, who's
[Amit Varma]: also played the guitar a couple of times where I've tried out these little spoken word things
[Amit Varma]: in the intros, extremely embarrassing now that I think about it.
[Amit Varma]: My next, my second producer was a gentleman named Abbas Momin, who's in the studio now,
[Amit Varma]: who at some point got bored and decided that I am not producing the show anymore.
[Amit Varma]: I would rather produce Cyrus Says.
[Amit Varma]: And he left me for Cyrus Says, at which point I'm funnier than Cyrus Says, if inadvertently,
[Amit Varma]: at which point my next producer was Swati Bakshi, who recently left to pursue further
[Amit Varma]: studies abroad and Abbas is now back reluctantly, though he tries to smile now and then.
[Amit Varma]: All the illustrations that you see are done by Aleka Gupta, very quiet, unassuming person
[Amit Varma]: who just, you know, I'll give illustration ideas and she'll pick one of the ideas and
[Amit Varma]: she'll execute and it doesn't even need to come back to me to see it because she does
[Amit Varma]: such such an amazing job.
[Amit Varma]: So I'm a big fan of that.
[Amit Varma]: Vijay Doifode has been my editor for all 100 episodes and he is just incredible.
[Amit Varma]: And now, of course, it's a straight up easy editing job.
[Amit Varma]: But at one point I would talk about dream sequences in my intros and there would be
[Guest]: sound effects and all that and Vijay was...
[Guest]: Which I believe Twitter sort of trolled you for and caused you to can it.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, they, let us just say the listener feedback was not very good, but I heard it and every
[Amit Varma]: once in a while some random guy will pop up and say that, yeah, I really like those dream
[Amit Varma]: sequences, bring them back.
[Amit Varma]: And I am like that, you know, it's very difficult for me to get people to like what I do, you
[Amit Varma]: know.
[Amit Varma]: I'm not going to mess with that again.
[Amit Varma]: So those dream sequences and those spoken word poems with guitar in the background are
[Amit Varma]: all gone.
[Guest]: Our loss.
[Guest]: Yeah.
[Amit Varma]: And my various sound engineers like Tejesh Sringarpure, like my good friend Mayur here
[Amit Varma]: sitting here, who's given me much investment advice in the past, yeah.
[Guest]: And Mayur also plays the guitar among other things.
[Guest]: Mayur also plays the guitar?
[Amit Varma]: You never told me that, bro.
[Amit Varma]: He's a full-time musician.
[Amit Varma]: He warned you not to tell me because I'll make you play.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah.
[Amit Varma]: Okay.
[Amit Varma]: I'm going to revive some spoken word plus guitar thing at some point in the future.
[Amit Varma]: Moving on.
[Amit Varma]: You should thank your guests.
[Amit Varma]: That's actually a given and yeah, obviously, I mean, this show is, I mean, you know, a
[Amit Varma]: lot of people honestly have been so generous with their time just to come and sit with
[Amit Varma]: me and talk to me, not just the stars like Harsha Bhogle, obviously, who are like, you
[Amit Varma]: know, at a different level and it's so sweet of them to come and talk, but absolutely everyone.
[Amit Varma]: Opportunity costs, like you say.
[Guest]: So I don't know what the hell to get out of it.
[Guest]: One big thing you bring to the table other than your radio looks and, you know, I think,
[Guest]: you know, really incredibly smart people and you have found a way to listen to them, right?
[Guest]: So you have expertise in a whole bunch of areas more than most people do, but you've
[Guest]: managed to find people who have very specific expertise and bring them on and actually help
[Guest]: them showcase what it is that they do.
[Guest]: I think that's quite cool.
[Amit Varma]: That's a continuing effort and we'll keep trying in good faith to make it work.
[Amit Varma]: So if you don't like the odd episode, what to do, ask for a refund.
[Guest]: You know, for all our cribbing about the government, the refund might be like a government system
[Guest]: in this case.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, I got to tell you, you know, so what happened is, as you know, I'm going to Hong
[Amit Varma]: Kong tonight.
[Amit Varma]: We're recording this on the 21st.
[Amit Varma]: I'm going to Hong Kong for a week tonight.
[Amit Varma]: And last Friday I suddenly realized that my passport had expired and I was like, oh shit,
[Amit Varma]: what do I do now?
[Unknown]: How do I get it done?
[Amit Varma]: Yeah.
[Amit Varma]: So now I did not know about this Satkal thing.
[Amit Varma]: The last this had happened to me, my father, who was then a working IAS officer in the
[Amit Varma]: late nineties, had used major government pull in the central government and I got it within
[Amit Varma]: a week.
[Amit Varma]: And I thought, damn it, I don't have that kind of pull anymore because the old man has
[Amit Varma]: retired.
[Amit Varma]: So what's going to happen to me?
[Amit Varma]: So I went online, I did an application.
[Amit Varma]: I got an appointment the next morning.
[Amit Varma]: I went the next morning, gave the application.
[Amit Varma]: Within 23 hours, the passport was in my hand and I was like, goodbye libertarian days.
[Amit Varma]: Government works.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah.
[Amit Varma]: This is the future.
[Amit Varma]: Of course, you're outsourced to TCS and all that.
[Guest]: But no, but even before they had, I've got a Satkal passport and you know, there are
[Amit Varma]: some areas in which credit must be given when it's due.
[Amit Varma]: Credit must be given.
[Amit Varma]: And it's kind of sad that we should feel so happy and ecstatic and overjoyed at the government
[Guest]: doing something that, hey, it's supposed to do.
[Guest]: When anyone does something that they're supposed to do, I feel quite happy.
[Guest]: Yeah.
[Guest]: Right.
[Guest]: No, I mean, my Ola cab didn't show up on time today.
[Guest]: It took a really long time because Chembur is a bit complicated and he apparently got
[Guest]: lost and so on and so forth.
[Guest]: So when anyone does anything, you know, without creating uncertainty or confusion, it's pretty
[Amit Varma]: nice.
[Amit Varma]: Which is actually great because I think too many of us feel too entitled.
[Amit Varma]: And this has happened to me also that I feel entitled to efficiency, that somewhere I am
[Amit Varma]: getting bad service and I will think that, damn it, I work so hard, I'm so efficient,
[Amit Varma]: which is not true, but whatever.
[Amit Varma]: I work so hard.
[Amit Varma]: I'm so efficient.
[Amit Varma]: Why can't I expect the same back when I'm paying for it?
[Amit Varma]: But I think we should all be a little less entitled and we'll be happier.
[Guest]: I've learned gratitude living in America, to be very honest, which is also something
[Guest]: we've spoken about in the past.
[Guest]: Which is in fact a point that Kumar brought up.
[Guest]: I mean, I guess because I don't know exactly where the roots of this come from.
[Guest]: I haven't thought about it deeply enough, but I feel like when you grow up in a particular,
[Guest]: you know, economic and social strata in India, you're sort of born with everything and you're
[Guest]: very privileged.
[Guest]: And like you said, you know, your parents used to get you into the right school or to
[Guest]: get you a passport when the facility wasn't there and so on.
[Guest]: And because things have been handed to you, you tend to feel like, oh, this should have
[Amit Varma]: happened.
[Amit Varma]: And I'll share it with my listeners.
[Amit Varma]: And I wonder what people think about that, you know, leave Twitter comments if you have
[Amit Varma]: any insights into this.
[Amit Varma]: But so my friend Kumar Anand had sort of shared this insight with me that one of his friends
[Amit Varma]: who was visiting from the US, Andrew Humphries, in fact, whom you know, yeah, so I think Andrew
[Amit Varma]: made the point to him that, you know, that Indians don't seem to feel much gratitude.
[Amit Varma]: Like whenever Andrew would be served at a restaurant or, you know, an auto driver would
[Amit Varma]: take him somewhere and he'd be like, thank you, and he'd mean it.
[Amit Varma]: But Indians, if they say thank you at all, say it in a very pro forma way.
[Amit Varma]: And I don't know if this is a Protestant value or a Judeo Christian value or whatever it
[Amit Varma]: is, but people in the West just seem to say thank you and mean thank you, feel the gratitude
[Amit Varma]: more than people here do.
[Amit Varma]: And we were trying to figure out why could that be?
[Amit Varma]: I mean, is it is it a cultural thing?
[Amit Varma]: Is it because Indians have, you know, grown up in this zero sum environment where everyone
[Amit Varma]: is just going grab what you can, or?
[Guest]: I think that's part of it.
[Guest]: I think a very large part of it is the caste system.
[Guest]: You know, we're all, I mean, if you go by the rules of the caste system, we're born
[Unknown]: into the jobs we're supposed to be doing.
[Unknown]: And it is our dharma to do it.
[Guest]: So why should you be thanked for it?
[Guest]: Right?
[Guest]: So if the sweeper is sweeping well, that's what he was supposed to do.
[Unknown]: Why was he born a sweeper?
[Guest]: Because he must have done something bad in his past life.
[Guest]: So he was born in the low caste as a sweeper.
[Guest]: And we have this whole mythology built around why every person has their place in society
[Guest]: and they're doing what they're supposed to do.
[Guest]: And if they are not doing what they're supposed to do, they're not following their dharma.
[Guest]: And you know, then God's wrath will be upon them and they will be born as a snail or something,
[Guest]: you know, something terrible.
[Guest]: So the idea that people genuinely are doing you something, which is, you know, they're
[Guest]: being good to you, and you acknowledge that that is something wonderful, that was not
[Guest]: something that they were supposed to do anyway.
[Guest]: I think culturally is a little bit lacking in us.
[Amit Varma]: In fact, if that's the case, and that tells us that there's something very toxic about
[Amit Varma]: our culture.
[Guest]: I think it's very toxic.
[Guest]: You know, when I was talking about this just a couple of days ago, I can't remember with
[Guest]: whom, with Pranay Kothasthani, another common friend and a wonderful guest on your show.
[Guest]: I was in Bangalore with him, we were having breakfast at MTR, a meal I thoroughly enjoyed.
[Guest]: We were talking about how there seems to be division of labor, right?
[Guest]: Lots of people working at MTR, but the division of labor is not the market division of labor.
[Guest]: Person who takes your order is different from the person who serves you, and is different
[Guest]: from the person who cleans the table.
[Guest]: And it's not because there is so much business that they need to divide.
[Guest]: It's because the person who takes your order will not touch the dirty dishes.
[Guest]: Wow.
[Guest]: Right?
[Guest]: There is a deep caste element to this, which is in front of us all the time, which we just
[Guest]: don't notice because we're so accustomed to it, right?
[Guest]: And because we're fortunate enough to be on the right side of that divide, so we can ignore
[Guest]: that and pretend it doesn't exist.
[Guest]: There's a lovely Akhil Katyal poem on that, actually, which I can't remember the exact
[Guest]: verse, but it talks about how a young person doesn't know his caste and he's 12 years old,
[Amit Varma]: and someone says to him, then you must be upper caste, if you don't know your caste
[Amit Varma]: by the time you're 12.
[Amit Varma]: That's a beautiful poem.
[Amit Varma]: I had retweeted that.
[Amit Varma]: I'm giving a kudos to the Times of India for running his poems every Sunday on the Sunday
[Amit Varma]: Times of India, which is so fashionable to shit on the Times of India, but they do good
[Guest]: things.
[Guest]: No, they do some.
[Amit Varma]: I mean, you have a column in there.
[Amit Varma]: I have a column in there.
[Amit Varma]: All my anti-Modi columns have come in the Times of India and yet those guys are, you
[Amit Varma]: know, harangued for being whatever.
[Amit Varma]: I think times really subsist in different silos and the silos act independently and
[Amit Varma]: they do their own thing.
[Amit Varma]: And the Sunday Times of India is an awesome silo.
[Guest]: Yeah, it really is.
[Guest]: I mean, I have read the Times of India most of my life in India because of the RK Lakshman
[Amit Varma]: cartoon.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah.
[Amit Varma]: Right.
[Amit Varma]: Shout out to my editor Neelam.
[Amit Varma]: And moving on to happier things as it's getting time to wind up and we're running out of studio
[Amit Varma]: time.
[Amit Varma]: What books have you read this year, which you really enjoyed?
[Guest]: I've read a bunch of books.
[Guest]: I don't think I read as much as you.
[Guest]: The last book I read, which was really fantastic was, it just came out, I think early December
[Guest]: it was released.
[Guest]: It's called Order Without Design.
[Guest]: It's by Alain Bertot.
[Guest]: I'm not sure if I'm saying his name right.
[Guest]: He's at the Marion Institute at NYU.
[Guest]: And he has a lot of experience in urban planning and policymaking.
[Guest]: And he's basically talked about how cities are emergent orders and how we think we can
[Guest]: design cities top down, but it never works and usually has terrible consequences.
[Guest]: I am really trimming the inside of his book into a couple of sentences.
[Guest]: His book has great stories.
[Guest]: It talks about the mill land, which was locked away, you know, because of industrial use
[Guest]: and, you know, prime Mumbai sort of real estate.
[Guest]: He talks about Beijing.
[Guest]: He talks about cities in Indonesia.
[Guest]: He talks about New York.
[Guest]: He talks about a lot of cities.
[Guest]: He has such fantastic insight.
[Guest]: And I had the opportunity of interacting with him a couple of times.
[Guest]: And his basic idea is that we need urban planning to sort of delineate what is a public space
[Guest]: and what is a private space.
[Guest]: And that's where the job of the planner ends, in a sense.
[Guest]: They shouldn't dictate what one must do with a private space, right?
[Guest]: This can only be a restaurant.
[Guest]: This can only be an art studio.
[Guest]: This can only be a residence.
[Guest]: That is a really bad idea.
[Guest]: And it also hampers cities from functioning the way they should function, which is as
[Guest]: in, you know, enormous labor markets and innovation markets.
[Guest]: So that book is really lovely.
[Guest]: It provides a lot of context, very insightful.
[Guest]: Another book, though it came out last year, but I must mention that I've had a new appreciation
[Guest]: for it this year with all the elections, is Milan Vaishnav's When Crime Pays.
[Guest]: I think it's an extraordinary book.
[Guest]: It basically talks about the nexus between criminality and politics, how Indians manage
[Guest]: to elect criminals and not criminals, you know, who are criminals like Gandhi and Nehru
[Guest]: were for protests or civil disobedience because of criminals.
[Guest]: They have kidnapping, you know, extortion, murder cases against them.
[Guest]: And his idea is that, you know, it's more beneficial because of the way campaign finance
[Guest]: is set up for political parties to have criminals because criminals come with their own funding
[Guest]: and elections are an incredibly costly business.
[Guest]: And the second part of it is individual citizens vote for criminals because they can get things
[Guest]: done because of state capacity being so low.
[Guest]: You actually want to vote for the local dada or the local goon because they will be able
[Guest]: to get you your Tadkal passport or, you know, get something fixed or get you your ration
[Guest]: card and so on and so forth.
[Guest]: Right.
[Guest]: They are the problem solvers.
[Amit Varma]: Absolutely.
[Guest]: So that book, exactly that book, I think, though it came out last year, I mean, it's
[Guest]: going to have relevance for a long time, but I think it was really this year's set of elections
[Guest]: really highlighted that book again.
[Guest]: What about you?
[Amit Varma]: What are the books that you read?
[Amit Varma]: Well, when you were speaking about, you know, Order Without Design, that kind of reminded
[Amit Varma]: me of a very old book, which I read this year, The Power Broker by Robert Caro.
[Unknown]: Yeah.
[Amit Varma]: Now, The Power Broker is a biography of a man called Robert Moses, who in a sense built
[Amit Varma]: modern New York over a period of 30 or 40 years, starting from the late 1920s.
[Amit Varma]: And Caro's book was commissioned, if I remember correctly, in around 64, he was supposed to
[Amit Varma]: write it in a year.
[Amit Varma]: Instead, he took 12 years to write it.
[Amit Varma]: And it was more than a million words.
[Amit Varma]: They eventually had to cut it down to 750,000 or something, which included an entire book
[Guest]: length section on the great Jane Jacobs.
[Guest]: Oh, wow.
[Guest]: She's fantastic.
[Amit Varma]: She wrote that all time classic, The Death and Life of Great American Cities.
[Amit Varma]: And in the process of writing that book and doing all the things that she did, ran up
[Amit Varma]: against Robert Moses.
[Amit Varma]: Yes.
[Amit Varma]: And I found The Power Broker an absolutely mind blowing book because it wasn't just a
[Amit Varma]: biography of this one man.
[Amit Varma]: It was also a biography of a city of New York City.
[Amit Varma]: It was a chronicle of a philosophy in top down design, which is that kind of high modernist
[Amit Varma]: planning where you plan everything and there is a restaurant and there is this and we need
[Amit Varma]: bridges and demolish all these neighborhoods because we need to do this there and so on
[Amit Varma]: and so forth.
[Amit Varma]: With Jane Jacobs fought against arguing for the organic growth of cities.
[Amit Varma]: And it's also a fascinating character study of how power corrupts, of how someone who
[Amit Varma]: starts out as an idealistic young man wanting to make a difference can become this absolute
[Amit Varma]: immoral monster by the end of it.
[Guest]: And Robert Moses is alive and well in New York City in the sense that it is being regulated
[Guest]: more and more heavily in terms of land use with each passing year.
[Guest]: I live in not just a landmarked building, but a landmarked neighborhood.
[Guest]: So the door of my building is about a hundred pounds.
[Guest]: I had shoulder surgery last year and I asked them, I said, why is this door like this?
[Guest]: A lot of like elderly people in the building, why can't we just change it or fix it?
[Guest]: And they said, we can't touch it.
[Guest]: It's landmarked.
[Guest]: So, you know, the show, The Marvelous Mrs. Maisel, one of the outdoor shots is of my
[Guest]: building.
[Guest]: Right.
[Guest]: And my building is in no way exceptional.
[Guest]: It's quite ordinary.
[Guest]: It's from a particular time, the early 1900s.
[Guest]: And there are plenty of those buildings, all of the neighborhood, and they are all landmarked,
[Guest]: which basically means that you can't change anything.
[Guest]: It's a privilege of the elite to enjoy historical landmarks.
[Guest]: These are not even that great.
[Guest]: And it prevents incumbents and future innovators from building new and better buildings.
[Guest]: And this is a sort of like Moses thinking versus like Jacob's or Hayekian thinking.
[Guest]: And you're absolutely right.
[Guest]: So yeah, I mean, Order Without Design also has a lot of Jacob's insights.
[Amit Varma]: I'm looking forward to reading that book and I have some really great guests lined up.
[Amit Varma]: I don't want to jinx it by naming them, but people I'm very excited about.
[Amit Varma]: So if those work out, we shall see.
[Amit Varma]: And of course, you shall always be a recurring presence on my show, I hope.
[Guest]: Yes, I would love to.
[Guest]: And here's to many more hundreds of episodes in the future.
[Guest]: And congratulations to you and the whole IVM team.
[Amit Varma]: Thank you.
[Amit Varma]: And I don't know when you say many more hundreds of shows, I'm thinking is that a blessing
[Amit Varma]: or a curse?
[Guest]: What are you doing?
[Guest]: Shut up.
[Guest]: And to all the listeners, you can continue your labor of love.
[Amit Varma]: All right.
[Guest]: If that's where you put it, thank you so much.
[Guest]: Thank you for having me.
[Amit Varma]: If you enjoyed listening to this episode, do head on over to Twitter where you can follow
[Amit Varma]: and troll Shruti at S Rajagopalan, S Rajagopalan, I hope you can spell that.
[Amit Varma]: And you can follow me at Amit Verma, A-M-I-T-V-A-R-M-A.
[Amit Varma]: You can browse all 100 episodes of The Scene in the Unseen at sceneunseen.in and thinkpragati.com.
[Amit Varma]: Thank you for listening and hope you keep listening for a hundred more.
[Unknown]: Well, thank you for listening.
[Unknown]: Family businesses get a bad rap.
[Unknown]: At one time they were looked down on for getting rich, for being too ambitious.
[Unknown]: Today they're still looked down on, but for not being ambitious enough, not agile enough,
[Unknown]: not modern enough, too traditional in their mindset.
[Unknown]: The biggest brands and business houses in the country started out as humble family businesses.
[Unknown]: It's the way India has done business.
[Unknown]: Join Sonu Basin in conversation with stalwarts of Indian family businesses on the Inheritance
[Unknown]: Podcast series by Bloomberg Quint.
[Unknown]: Discuss the highs and lows, the needs and pressure points of building a business legacy
[Unknown]: that spans generations.
[Unknown]: Hello, everybody.
[Unknown]: We have a brand new daily podcast we're working on with Bloomberg Quint.
[Unknown]: All you need to know provides the top news on business, markets, and the economy so that
[Unknown]: you can stay ahead of the curve.
[Unknown]: Tune in every morning on BloombergQuint.com, the IBM podcast app, or wherever you get your
[Unknown]: podcasts from.